f!FFl

---

PART III

MAJOR ADMINISTRATIVE MEASURES ADOPTBD BYTHE MONETARY BOARD IN 2OO4

OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS, CIRCULARS, DIRBCTIONS AND NOTICES

Bank Supervision Department pogel. Determination on Capital Adequacy Ratio - No. 02104/0O2i0005/003 (i)

2. Interpretation of Capital Funds - No. 02/O4lOO2l0005/003 (i)

3. Guidelines on Credit Rating of Banking Institutions - No. 02104t0O3/0400/001 (ii)4. Guidelines for External Auditors relating Io their statutory duties in terms ofSection 39 of the Banking Act No.30 of 1988 as anrended by the Banking Act, No.33 of 1995 (ii)5. Monthly Statement of Liquid Assets for the Domestic Banking Unit (DBU) andOff-shore Banking Unit (OBU) - No. 02/04lOO2lOO05/003 (iv)

6. Classification of Advances and Specific Provisions/Criteria for Selection ofValuers Undertaking the Revaluation of Fixed Assets forthe Computation of the Capital Adequacy Ratio - No. 02/04100310400/001 (iv)7. Single Borrower Limit - No. o2l04lo02l0005/003 (vi)

8. Classification of Bad & Doubtful Advances forProvisioning Purposes - No. 02104/002/0005/004 (vi)9. Shipping Guarantees Issued by Banks - No. 02/04/003/04001002 (ix)

10. Valuation of Securities for Provisioning Purposes - No. 02/041002/01031002 (xi)

I l. Accounting for Properties Acquired by Foreclosure of Collateral/Part Sctrlement of Debt (xii)

12. Withdrawals on Savings Accounts (xiii)

Domestic Operations Department13. Operating Instructions on Open Market Operations of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka- In Scripless Government Securities - No. 35/01/00510006104 (xiv)

14. Operating Instructions on provision of Intra-Day Liquidity Facility (ILF) againsrScripless Government Securities on LankaSettle - No. 35/U1O05/OO061O5 (xxi)

15. Open Market Operations (OMO) of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka-No. 35/01/00510006106 (xxiii)

16. Operating Instructions on provision of Intra-Day Liquidity Facility (ILF) againstScripless Govelnment Securities on LankaSettle - No. 35/01/00510006107 (xxiv)

17. Operating Instructions on Open Market Operations of the Central Bank of Sri Lankain Scripless Government Securities - No. 35/01/005/006/08 (xxv)

18. Malgin Requirements Against Letters of Credit - No. 35/01/005/0010/01 (xxvii)

Exchange Control Department

19. Release of Foreign Exchange to Gem Dealers as an Advance Payment forthe Import of Gems from Madagascar- No. 06/05/0 r/2004

20. Monitoring Scheme for Imports made on Advance Payment Terms- No. 0610510212004

21. Sri Lanka Development Bonds (SLDBs) - No. 0610410312004

22. Release of Foreign Exchange to Gem Dealers as an Advance Payment for

the Import of Gems from Myanmar- No. 0610510412004

23. Freight Forwarding and Issue of House Airway Bills/House Bills of Lading/Forwarders Cargo Receipts- No. 06107/0512004(xxxvi)

International Operations Department24. Guidelines to Commercial Banks on Foreign Exchange Swaps (USD/LKR) - Operating Instructions- No. 331051031/0004/001 (xxxvii)

Payments and Settlements Department

25. Opening of the RTGS System for testing the CSS Pre-Live Release withthe live CAS System - Circular No. RTGS/O112004- No. 341071029/0001/001 (xxxiii)

26. Appointment of New Participants to the LankaSettle System - Nat-Wealth Securities Limited- Circular No. RTGS/O212004- No. 341071029/0001/001 (xxxiii)

27. Restriction of Business Hours of LankaSettle on April 30, 2OO4 - Circular No. RTGS/O312004- No. 341071029/0001/001 (xxxix)

28. Amendments to the Daily Operating Schedule ofthe LankaSettle System - Circular No. RTGS/O412004 - No. 341071029/0001/001 (xl)

29. Opening the RTGS System for RTGS-GL Inrerface Testingon August 01,2004 - Circular No. RTGS/O512004- No. 341071029/0001/00t (xl)

30. Restriction of Business Hours of LankaSettle on December 24, and December 3I,2004- Circular No. RTGS/0612004

Public Debt Department3I. Direction on Short Selling of Securities

32. Amendment to LankaSettle System Rules August 2003

33. Direction on Adjusted Trading (Away Prices)

- No. 34lj7lo29l0001/001 (xli)

(xxx)

(xxxi)

(xxxiii)

(xxxv)

- No. 081241002100051004

- No. 08124/002/0005/004

(xlii)

(xlii)

(xliv)

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2004

Ref. : 02 I 01 I 002/0005 / 003

To : All Licensed Comnrcrcial Battks

Dear Sir/Madam

Bank Supervision Department2 January 2004

I refer to the Determination on Capital Adequacy Ratio dated 22 August 1997 as amended on27 December 20Ol and 24 December 2002 and write to clarify the following requirements relating tomaintenance of the Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) in terms of the said Determination.

I. All Licensed Commercial Banks (LCBs) are required at all times to maintain a CAR of l0 per centat the minimum in relation to its risk weighted assets, with core capital constituting not less than5 per cent, both on a bank only/solo basis considering the domestic and off-shore banking units,and on a consolidated basis i.e., including the bank and all subsidiaries. In respect of the foreignbanks, the consolidation would be only in respect of the subsidiaries in Sri Lanka, if any.

II. Accordingly, all LCBs are required to submit two returns on the statutory Capital Adequacy Ratio

as at the end of each quarter of the year, commencing from the quarter ended 3l December 2003,

as follows:

(c) Return indicating the CAR on a bank only/solo basis.

(D) Return indicating the CAR on a consolidated basis.

III. All LCBs are also required to submit the above two returns based on the audited data after thecompletion of the annual audit, in addition to the quarterly returns.

Yours faithfully,

Sgd./ Director of Bank Supervision

Ref. : 02 104 1002 / 0005 / 003Bank Supervision Department6 Januarv 2004To : AII Licensecl Comrnercial Bartks nnd

Li cettsed Speciulisecl Bartks

Dear Sir/Madam

INTERPRETATION OF CAPITAL FUNDS

All Domestic Licensed Commercial Banks and Licensed Specialised Banks are hereby informed that theproceeds of redeemable cumulative preference shares would constitute part of Capital Funds of banks for thepurpose clf Banking Act, and the direction issued thereunder, relating to the basis for the computation of theSingle Borrorver Limit and Investments in Equity in terms of section 46 and l7A respectively and, section76J(I) of the Banking Act.

Yours faithfully,

Sgd./ Director of Bank Supervision

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2004(i)

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2oo4

Ref. : 02 104 / 003 I 0400 | 001Bank Supervision Departmentl9 Januarv 2004To : AII Clicf Erecutive Officers of LCBs und LSBs

Dear Sirs

I refer to the discussions on the above subject at the meetings of the Chief Executive Officers ofLicensed Commercial Banks (LCBs) and Licensed Specialised Banks (LSBs) held on 20.11.2003 and18.12.2003 and the agreement of the Chief Executive Officers to obtain ratings for banks.

All LCBs and LSBs are hereby required to observe the following guidelines in this regard.l. All LCBs and LSBs (both local and foreign) are hereby required to obtain a Credit Rating on orbefole 30 June 2004.

2. All ratings should be from an independent rating agency acceptable to the Central Bank of SriLanka.

3. Local Branches of foreign banks may disclose their parent bank's rating.4. With effect from July 2004, all banks are required to disclose their rating in all their advertisementssoliciting deposits and other debt instruments. The fact that a bank lras not obtained a rating shouldalso be disclosed, if that is the case.

5. Credit Ratings should be updated annually and the rating report should be submitted to the CentralBank of Sri Lanka rvithin one month from the date of the report.

Please acknowledge the receipt of this letter.

Yours faithfully,

Sgd./ Dircctor of Bank Supervision

Bank Supervision Department27 April2004To : All Approved Exterrtnl Auditors

Dear Sir

The Central Bank of Sri Lanka as the Supervisoly and regulatory autholity of bankin-e institutionsstrives crtntinually to mitigate atrd matrage the attendilnt risks in the banking sector in S1i Larrka. The CBSLrecognizes the irnportant role played by the External Audit firms in this regard and is workin_u towardsirnproving the quality and tlre inte_erity of bank audits.

( ii )Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Reoort - 2OO4

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2O04

Si-enificant developments and changes have taken place in the global financial architecture since theintroduction of the first guidelines to External Auditors by the CBSL. As you are aware, the Sarbanes-OxleyAct of the US has attempted to address some of these issues. Accordingly, the Monetary Board of the CentralBank of Sri Lanka has approved the attached Addendum to the Guidelines issued on 20 May 1998. The CBSLbelieves that these additional guidelines will address some of these concerns and conttibute towards theimprovement of bank audits in Sri Lanka.

Since your firm is one the panel of approved auditors of the Central Bank, you are required to ensurethat your firm is in compliance with these guidelines, which are operative with immediate effect.

Please acknowledge receipt of this letter.

Yours faithfully,

Sgd./ Director of Bank SupervisionBncl:

Artrtex I

GUIDELINES FOR EXTERNAI, AUDITORS RELATING TO TIIBIR STATUTORY DUTIESIN TERI\{S OF SECTION 39 OF TIIE BANKING ACT NO. 30 OF 1988AS AMENDED BY TIIE BANKING ACT NO. 33 OF 1995

ADDENDUM

Non-Audit Services

l. Qualified External Auditors shall not undertake any consultancy or other non-audit serviccs with a bankcontemporaneously with the external audit. The restricted non-audit services are :. Book keeping or other services related to the accounting records or financial statemcnts of the audit client;. Financial information systems design and implementatlon;. Appraisal or valuation services, fhirness options, or contribution-in-kind reports;. Actuarial services;, Internal audit outsourcing services;. Management functions, human rcsources and payroll services;. Broker or dealer, investment adviser, or investment banking services; and. Legal services and expert services related to the audrt.

This restriction also applies to services provided by entities where a partner of an Audit Firm is a Director or has a

si gnificant share holding.

Management Letter

2. External Audit flrms are requested to submit the Management Letter. which is non-statutory report by the Auditor tothe management of the Bank, to.qetl'ler with the published audited accounts to thc Banks they audit, within five monthsof the end of the flnancial year- If the auditors are unable to finalize the Managcment Letter, they should subrnit aninterim repofi u,ith their major findings within tlrc said period. This rvill enable the Banks and the Re-rulator toidentify significant and systemically important risks in a tirnely nlanner.

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2004( iii )

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2004

Ref. : 02 | 04 | 002/0005 / 003Bank Supervision Department20 May 2004To : All Liccnsed Contntercial Bartks

Dear Sir/Madam

MONTHLY STATEMENT OF LIQUID ASSETS FOR

Reference the Determination dated 24.12.2002 and Directions dated 21.01.2003 and 08.10.2003 on theabove subject.

All licensed commercial banks are required to note that they should maintain Statutory Liquid Assets ofan amount not less than2OTo of total liabilities, less liabilities to the Central Bank and to the share holders, inrespect of the DBU in Rupees and in respect of the OBU in US dollars, for each month commencing May2004.

Any deficiency in Statutory Liquid Assets in the DBU or in the OBU will be subject to the provisions ofSection 2l(3) of the Banking Act, No. 30 of 1988 as amended by the Banking (Amendment) Act, No. 33 of1995, and the penalty involved will be payable in Rupees in the case of the DBU and in US dollars in the caseof the OBU.

Please acknowledge receipt of this letter.

Yours faithfully,

Sgd./ Director of Bank Supervision

Ref. : 021 01/ 003 | 0400 / 001Bank Supervision Departmentl3 Julv 2004To : CEOs of all Licensecl Conunercietl Bartks

Dear Sirs

Licensed Commercial Banks (LCBs) are required to note the following :-l. Current professional valuation reports referred to in the Directions dated 22 August 1997 onClassification of Advances and Specific Provisions issued under Section 464. of the Banking Actshall mean current professional valuation reports obtained from external independent valuers.2. For the Purpose of the Directions ret'erred to in I above, the banks are exempted from therequirement to obtain professional valuation reports in respect of loans and advances of Rs. 250,000or below, subject to the condition that a current internal assessment of the value of propertiesmortgaged for such loans, signed by the Assistant General Manager or such other senior officer ofthe bank in charge of credit, is available.

Note : Current internal assessment is defined as an assessment that is not more than two years old.

(iv)Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2004

Part ll!Major Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2004

3. Valuers referred to in the circular dated l9 April 1999 issued on "Criteria for Selection of ValuersUndertaking the Revaluation of Fixed Assets for the Computation of the Capital Adequacy Ratio"shall mean external Independent valuers.

Please acknowledge receipt of this circular.

Yours faithfully,

Sgd./ Director of Bank Supervision

Ref. : 02 | 04/ 003 | 0400/001Bank Supervision Department13 Julv 2004To : CEOs of all Licensecl Speciulised Bottks

Dear Sirs

CLASSIFICATION OF ADVANCES AND SPECIFIC PROVISIONS/CRITERIA FORSELECTION OF VALUERS UNDERTAKING THE REVALUATION OFFIXED ASSETS FOR THE COMPUTATION OF THE CAPITAL ADEQUACY RATIO

Licensed Specialised Banks (LSBs) are required to note the following :-l. Current professional valuation reports referred to in the Directions dated 2l November 1997 onClassification of Advances and Specific Provisions issued under Section 761(I) of the Banking Actshall mean current professional valuation reports obtained from external independent valuers.2. For the Purpose of the Directions referred to in I above, the banks are exempted from therequirement to obtain professional valuation reports in respect of loans and advances of Rs. 250,000or below, subject to the condition that a current internal assessment of the value of propertiesmortgaged for such loans, signed by the Assistant General Manager or such other senior officer ofthe bank in charge of credit, is available.

Note : Current internal assessment is defined as an assessment that is not more than two years old.3. Valuers referred to in the circular dated l9 April 1999 issued on "Criteria for Selection of ValuersUndertaking the Revaluation of Fixed Assets for the Computation of the Capital Adequacy Ratio"shall mean external Independent valuers.

Please acknowledge receipt of this circular.

Yours faithfully,

Sgd./ Director of Bank Supervision

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2004(v)

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2004

Ref. : OZ 104 | 002 / 0005 / 003Bank Supervision Departmentl6 Julv 2004To : CEOs of Licertsecl Comntercial Bartks lrtcorporatecl outside Sri LankrtAuditors approvecl by the CBSLSecrctary Gencrul, SLBAAll Officers

Dear Sir

SINGLE BORROWER LIMIT

This has reference to the amendment made to the direction issued with regard to the Single BorrowerLimit (SBL) on 24 December 2002, making the SBL applicable also to the Offshore Banking Units. Thelicensed commercial banks incorporated outside Sri Lanka that consider advances as the basis for thecomputation of their SBL are required to :-(t) Treat the Domestic Banking Unit (DBU) and the Off-shore Banking Unit (OBU) separately and tolimit the single borrower exposure in these units to I5Vo of the accommodation of the respectiveunrts;(tt) Where a bank wishes to use an SBL of l5vo of the consolidated accomrnodation of the DBU andthe OBU, such limit determined in US Dollars could be applied for OBU provided, such excessover l5Vo of the OBU accommodation be supported by a Head Office guarantee or an undertaking.(iii) Where a single customer enjoys facilities from both the DBU and the OBU of the same bank, thecombined exposure to such customer should be limited to l57o of the total accommodation ofeither the DBU or the OBU whichever is higher; and(tv) Consider the monthly average of total accommodation of the preceding year as certified by a firmof External Auditors as the basis for the computation of the SBL from year 2005.If any of the current exposures i.e., as at 30 June 2004 are in excess of the Iimits referred to above suchexcesses are required to be regularized to fall within the provisions of this circular by the end of the year2004.

Yours faithfully,

Sgd./ Director of Bank Supervision

Ref. : 02 I 04 I 002/0005 /004Bank Supervision Department8 September 2004To : CEOs of Licensed CoDrnercial Barks

Dear Sir

CLASSIFICATION OF BAD & DOUBTFUL ADVANCES FOR PROVISIONING PURPOSES

We refer to the agreement reached at the Meeting of CEOs of Licensed Commercial Banks (LCBs) and. Licensed Specialised Banks (LSBs) held on l9 August 2004, to introduce guidelines on the basis of whichdeviations could be sought by banks from classification norms stipulated in the Directions dated 22 August

1vi )Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2004

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2004

1997 issued by the Central Bank under Section 464' of the Banking Act, in respect of Project Oriented TernLoans to small and medium enterprises.

The banks are advised to adhere to the following guidelines in this regard.

Guidelines on which a Deviation may be approved on the Classification ofMedium and Long-term Project loans :

I. Eligible Advances : Medium and Long-term project loans. (Loans with a maturity of more thanl2 months)II. Deviation Permitted : A six month period of default may be observed before classification asNon-performing Adr,ances (NPA) instead of the 3 month period of arrears considered under theexisting directions.

(Permitting a longer period than 6 months would be contrary to the CRIB Act, and also 6 monthsis considered a sufficient period of time to test a project's capacity to revive from project-relatedproblems).III. Conditions to be satisfied by banks when seeking approval for deviations:(a) The lending bank should provide reasonable grounds to show that the existing problem is aresult of circumstances beyond the control of the borrower and not due to his exceeding hisborrowing capacity.(b) The circumstances should be of a temporary nature and should not affect the long-termviability of the project.

Such circumstances would be :l. Sudden cancellation of certain/specific orders due to problems faced by the buyer and not due topoor quality of goods/services supplied.2. Natural calamities such as floods, drought or, in the case of agriculture and fisheries projects,diseases affecting the products that would hamper normal operations. The bank should substantiatethe capacity of the project to recommenced normal operations within an agreed period of time.3. Developments in the international markets that would adversely affect the conditions of thesupplier/buyer.4. Government legislation that creates temporary impediments in the fields of the respective projects.5. Civil commotion and other similar incidents that would temporarily suspend the operations of theproJect.6. Temporary stoppage of project operations due to prolonged labour unrests.7. Temporary economic downturn and cyclical trends affecting a particular sector likely to becorrected during the short term.

The banks should write to the Department of Bank Supervision explaining the circumstances withsupporting documentary evidence such as financial statements and cash flows etc. together with a proposedplan of action of the borrower to arrest the temporary ploblems and commenced repayments.

Please acknowledge receipt of this circular.

Yours faithfully,

Sgd./ Director of Bank Supervision

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Reporl - 2004(vii )

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2004

Ref. : 02 l04l 002 / 0005 lOO4Bank Supervision Department8 September 2004To : CEOs of Liccnsed Speciulisecl Butks

Dear Sir

CLASSIFICATION OF BAD & DOUBTFUL ADVANCES FOR PROVISIONING PURPOSBS

We refer to the agreement reached at the Meeting of CEOs of Licensed Commercial Banks (LCBs) andLicensed Specialised Banks (LSBs) held on l9 August 2004, to introduce guidelines on the basis of whichdeviations could be sought by banks from classification norms stipulated in the Directions dated2l November 1997 issued by the Central Bank under Section 76J(I) of the Banking Act, in respect of ProjectOriented Tern Loans to small and medium enterprises.

The banks are advised to adhere to the following guidelines in this regard.

Guidelines on which a Deviation may be approved on the Classification ofMedium and Long-term Project loans :

I. Eligible Advances : Medium and Long-term project loans. (Loans with a maturity of more thanl2 months)II. Deviation Permitted : A six month period of default may be observed before classification asNon-performing Advances (NPA) instead of the 3 month period of arrears considered under theexisting directions.

(Permitting a longer period than 6 months would be contrary to the CRIB Act, and also 6 monthsis considered a sufficient period of time to test a project's capacity to revive from project-relatedproblems).IIL Conditions to be satisfied by banks when seeking approval for deviations:(a) The lending bank should provide reasonable grounds to show that the existing problem is aresult of circumstances beyond the control of the borrower and not due to his exceeding hisborrowing capacity.(b) The circumstances should be of a temporary ncture and should not affect the long-termviability of the project.

Such circumstances would be :l. Sudden cancellation of certain/specific orders due to problems faced by the buyer and not due topoor quality of goods/services supplied.2. Natural calamities such as floods, drought or, in the case of agriculture and fisheries projects,diseases affecting the products that would hamper normal operations. The bank should substantiatethe capacity of the project to recommenced normal operations within an agreed period of time.3. Developments in the international'markets that would adversely affect the conditions of thesupplier/buyer.4. Government legislation that creates temporary impediments in the fields of the respective projects.5. Civil commotion and other similar incidents that rvould temporarily suspend the operations of theproject.6. Temporary stoppa_ce of project operations due to prolonged labour unrests.7. Temporary economic downturn and cyclical trends affecting a particular sector likely to becorrected durins the short term.

( viii )Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2004

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2004

The banks should write to the Department of Bank Supervision explaining the circumstances withsupporting documentary evidence such as financial statements and cash flows etc. together with a proposedplan of action of the borrower to arrest the temporary problems and commenced repayments.

Please acknowledge receipt of this circular.

Yours faithfully,

Sgd./ Director of Bank Supervision

Ref. : 02 104 / 003 I 0400 I 002Bank Supervision Departmentl6 December 2004To : CEOs of Licertsed Contmercial BanksCEOs of Licensecl Specialised BattksPrtnel of Approt,ed Auditors

Sec ritary Gene ral, SLBA

Dear Sirs

SHIPPING GUARANTEES ISSUBD BY BANKS

Further to the discussion of the above subject at the Meetings of the Chief Executive Officers ofLicensed Commercial Banks and Licensed Specialised Banks, the amendment to the Directions on SingleBorrower Limit and Risk Weighted Capital Adequacy Ratio to enable the banks to include shippingguarantees issued at the invoice value of goods, are included herewith.

Please acknowledge receipt.

Yours faithfully,

Sgd./ Director of Bank SupervisionEncls:

BANKTNG ACT NO. 30 OF 1988AS AMENDED BY BANKING (AMENDMENT) ACT NO. 33 OF 1995

Amendment to the Determination made by the Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka asamended by the Determination made on 29 November 2000, under Section l9(2) and l9(7)(a) of the BankingAct, No.30 of 1988 as amended by the Banking (Amendrnent) Act, No.33 of 1995.

The follorving is added to the definition of Shipping Guarantees under ltem 19.1 in Schedule I of theabove Determination rvith immediate effect:

The invoice value of goods under each consignment for rvhich the shipping guarantee is issued could beincluded.

Colombol5 December. 2004Sgd./ Sunil MendisGoverttor

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2004(ix)

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2004

BANKING ACT NO. 30 OF 1988

Amendment to the Directions issued by the Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka asamended by the Dilection dated 29 November 2000, under Section 76(J)(l) of the Banking Act, No. 30 of1988 as amended by the Banking (Amendment) Act, No. 33 of 1995.

The following is added to the definition of Shipping Guarantees under Item L8.1 in Schedule I of theabove Direction with immediate effect:

The invoice value of goods under each consignment for which the shipping guarantee is issued could beincluded.

Colombol5 December.2004Sgd./ Sunil MendisGoventor

BANKING ACT NO. 30 OF 1988

Amendment to the Directions issued under Section a6(l)(c) of the Banking Act, No. 30 of 1988 asamended by the Banking (Amendment) Act, No. 33 of 1995.

Colombo Sgd./ Sunil Mendis15 December.2}04 Governor

BANKING ACT (SINGLE BORORWER LIMIT)DIRECTION NO. 2 OF 1999

The above Direction dated I I October 1999, as amended on 18 November 2003 is amended by theinsertion of the following paragraphs as paragraph 44, and 5e:4n. For the purpose of computing total advances under paragraph 4(i) above, shipping guaranteesissued should be included at the invoice value of goods under each consignment.5n. For the purpose of computing the outstanding amounts of accommodation under paragraph 3 orparagraph 4 above, shipping guarantees issued could be included at the invoice value of goodsunder each consignment.

The above amendment will be operative with immediate effect.

(x)Gentral Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report -2004

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 20e4

BANKING ACT NO. 30 OF 1988

Amendment to the Directions issued under Section 76J(l) of the Banking Act, No. 30 of 1988 asamended by the Banking (Amendment) Act, No. 33 of 1995.

Colombo Sgd./ Sunil Mendis15 December,20}4 Govemor

DIRECTION UNDER SECTION 76J(1)SINGLE BORORWER LIMIT

The following paragraph shall be inserted as paragraph 33. For the purpose of computing accommodation under paragraph I above, shipping guaranteesissued could be included at the invoice value of goods under consignment.

The above amendment will be operative with immediate effect.

Ref. : 02104 1002 / 0103 | 002Bank Supervision Department16 December 2004To : CEOs of Licensed Contntercial BanksPanel of Approt,ed Auditors

S ec retary G e rt e ral, S LBA

Dear Sirs

VALUATION OF SECURITIES FOR PROVISIONING PURPOSES

Further to the discussion of the above subject at the Meeting of the Chief Executive Officers ofLicensed Commercial Banks and Licensed Specialised Banks, and the agreement reached at the meeting heldon 25. 10.2004, please note the following amendment to the Directions issued in terms of Section 464 of theBanking Act, No. 30 of 1988 as amended by the Banking (Amendment) Act, No. 33 of 1995, amendment tothe Direction dated 15 August2003, and the Circular dated 13 July 2004.

Please acknowledge receipt.

Yours faithfully,

Sgd./ Director of Bank Supervision

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2004(xi )

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2004

Amendment to Directions on'suspension of Interest on Non-performing Advances and Classification of Bad and Doubtful advancesfor Provisioning Purposes: Valuation of Security for Provisioning Purposes'issued in terms of Section 46A of the Banking Act, No. 30 of 1988

The following paragraph shall be inserted after Section I of Schedule II of the above Direction.

The requirement to obtain a Current Professional Valuation report shall not apply in respect ofloans and advances of/with a balance of Rupees One million (Rs.1,000,000) or below, subject tothe availability of a current internal assessment of the value of properties mortgaged for suchloans, signed by the Assistant General Manager or such other senior officer of the bank in chargeof credit.A 'current internal assessment' is defined as an assessment of the value of the property by anemployee of the bank, that is not more than two years old.

The above amendment will be operative with immediate effect.

Colombo Sgd./ Sunil Mendis

15 December.2}D4 Goverrtor

Bank Supervision Department3l December 2004To : All Licensed Conunercial Banks andLicen secl Specialised BurtksApprovecl Auditars

Dear Sirs

It has been observed that the accounting treatment adopted by some banks with respect to immovableproperty acquired by foreclosure of collateral from defaulting customers or which have devolved on the banks

as part settlement of debt, leads to a misrepresentation of the bank's assets and the level of non-performing

advances of the bank.2. In order to create a uniform practice among the banks in accounting for such assets, and to avoidmisrepresentation of the level of non-performing advances, all banks are hereby informed to adhere to thefollowing procedure in accounting for such property:2.1 Immovable property acquired by foreclosure of collateral from defaulting customers, or which havedevolved on the banks as part settlement of debt should not be accounted for as investment property or

as part of the assets of the bank. Such property should be recorded on a memorandum basis.2.2 The related facility should remain classified in the books of the bank until such property is disposed of

and the proceeds realized by the bank.

(xii )Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2004

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2OO4

3. Your attention is drawn to Section 48A of the Banking Act, No.30 of I988, as amended by Act, No. 33of 1995, which requires banks to dispose of property acquired by foreclosure of collateral from defaultingcustomers or which have devolved on the banks as part settlement of debt, at the earliest opportunity.

Yours faithfully,

Sgd./ Director of Bank Supervision

Bank Supervision Department3l December 2004To : CEOs of Licensed Conunercial BanksSecretary G eneral, SLBA

Dear Sirs

WITHDRAWALS ON SAVINGS ACCOUNTS

This is to inform you that the restriction on payment of interest for a particular month, on savingsaccounts in respect of which there had been more than 4 withdrawals per month, in terms of CircularNo. 85/6/81 dated 29 June 1990, has been removed with immediate effect.

Please acknowledge receipt.

Yours faithfully,

Sgd./ Director of Bank Supervision

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2004( xiii )

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2004

Circular No. : 35 / 01 / 005 I 0006104

To : AII Licensecl Conurrercial Burtks arrclPrintary Dealers

Domestic Oper ations Department27 lanuarv 2004

OF THE CENTRAL BANK OF SRI LANKAIN SCRIPLESS GOVERNMENT SECURITIES

The Operating Instructions relating to Open Market Operations of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka inScripless government securities are outlined in this circular. These Operating Instructions shall come intoeffect with the implementation of LankaSecure on 2*d February 2004.

The Central Bank of Sri Lanka (CBSL) will conduct Open Market Operations (OMO) with LicensedCommercial Banks and Primary Dealers in government securities, hereinafter referred to as the ParticipatingInstitutions (PIs), in order to maintain the stability of inter bank interest rates within an interest rate corridor.The interest rate corridor defined in terms of the Repurchase Rate (lower bound) and the Reverse RepurchaseRate (upper bound) declared by the CBSL will be announced, reviewed and changed, if necessary, onmonthly intervals.

On the basis of an assessment of daily market liquidity situation, Market Operations Committee (MOC)of the CBSL will decide whether to absorb liquidity from or to inject liquidity to the market and the amount

and the type of transaction under which such absorption or injection of liquidity would be made. The CBSLwill announce its decision to the market through the on-line electronic bidding system and Reuter screen orany other effective means of communication. The auction system will be used to conduct OMO. The OMOwill consist of 'repurchase transactions (RP)','reverse repurchase transactions (RRP)', 'outright purchases'and'outright sales'. Repurchase and reverse repurchase facilities will also be available at the prevailing

repurchase rate and the reverse repurchase rate respectively on an overnight basis as standing facilities for PIswhich failed to meet their liquidity requirements at the auctions. The collateral used in these transactions will

be Treasury bills and Treasury bonds.

All Repurchase and Reverse Repurchase Transactions carried out between a PI and the CBSL in termsof Parts A, B and C of these Operating Instructions are subject to the provisions of the Master Repurchaseand Reverse Repurchase Agreement entered into between such PI and the Monetary Board of the CentralBank of Sri Lanka. The terms used in these Operating Instructions shall have the same meanings assigned to

them in the Master Repurchase and Reverse Repurchase Agreement-

The CBSL reserves the right to amend, revise or vary any term and/or condition or any part thereof of

these Operating Instructions with prior notice to PIs.

A. Repurchase Transactions (RP) under the Auction System

l.The tenure of Repurchase Transactions, until further notice, will be one day (overnight)

2.The Market Operations Committee (MOC) after assessing the daily liquidity position in the moneymarket will call for quotations (bids) from PIs by 1030 hours by way of an announcement on the on-line electronic bidding system and/or Reuter screen. It will also announce the quantum on offer.

3.A PI who wishes ro invest under RP facility is required to submit its bids to the OMO Division of the

Domestic Operation Department of the CBSL on or before 1100 hours the same day giving the amount

and the interest rate.

4. Bids should be submitted through the on-line electronic bidding system installed for this purpose. Bidsby telephone will be entertained only in the event of a failure of the on-line bidding system. Bids

(xiv)Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2OO4

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in ZOO4

submitted via telephone should be confirmed by fax signed by two authorized officers withinl5 minutes. The original of the fax should be sent to the Domestic Operation Department before theclose of business on the same day.

5. A PI can submit up to a maximum of three bids for each tender. The minimum amount of a bid shall beRupees one million and bids should be in multiples of Rupees one million. Any bid at or above rheCBSL reserve repurchase rate will be rejected.

6.Results of the auction will be announced at ll30 hours via the on-line electronic bidding systemand/or Reuter screen giving the total mount accepted and the Weighted Average RP rate (WARP).

7.Each successful bidder will be informed of the acceptance of its bid/s and allotment through theelectronic bidding system at I130 hours. The allotment will be made at the rares quoted by thesuccessful bidder. For each successful bid, scripless securities will be allocated at the Official Pricesdetermined on the basis of current market prices, for the amount requested.

8. A confirmation of RP transaction to each successful PI will be issued electronically through theelectrclnic bidding system within one hour after the release of results. The confirmation shallsubstantially be in the form at Annexure I. The PIs are advised to promptly view the confirmation andretain a hard copy of the confirmation for their records. In the event a PI is unable to view or print theconfirmation due to a technical failure in accessing the electronic bidding system, PSD will fax a copyof such confirmation to the PI on request.

9. The settlement of the transactions will be on a delivery versus payment (DVP) basis through theMatched Trade Feed facility available in LankaSettle. A Matched Trade Feed file will be submitted toLankaSettle at or before 12.45 hours, on the basis of which the system will settle the transaction bytransferring the allocated securities (Purchased Securities) to the Domestic Operations Repurchase(DOP) Account of the successful PI in LankaSecure against the receipt of funds (amount accepted) forthe sale value of securities (Purchase Price) to the Settlement Account of the CBSL. The PI is notrequired to submit any settlement instructions in this regard to the system. Purchased Securitiestransferred to the Domestic Operations Repurchase (DOP) Account should not be traded in by the PI.

10. Successful PIs should ensure that sufficient funds are available in their Settlement Account inLankaSettle to settle the Purchase Frice of Securities in full at or before 1245 hours. If a PI fails tosettle a RP transaction in full, the PI shall be liable to pay damages to the CBSL in a sum equivalent tothe difference between the sale value (Purchase Price) and the repurchase value (Repurchase Price)calculated as provided in these Operating Instructions.

I l. On the maturity date (Repurchase Date), a Matched Trade Feed file will be submitted to LankaSettle ator before 0830 hours to pay the Repurchase Price of securities to the Settlement Account of the PIagainst the delivery of the Purchased Securities to the Own Account of the CBSL in LankaSecure. inthe same manner as outlined in clause 9 above.

l2.Repurchase Price will consist of the Purchase Price (amount accepted) plus the interest componentwhich will be calculated at the rate quoted by the PI.

l3.PIs should ensure the availability of Purchased Securities in their Domestic Operations Repurchase(DOP) Account in LankaSecure on the Repurchase Date at the time specified in Clause I I above toenable the reversal of a repurchase transaction in full. In the event of there being insufficient securitiesin the Domestic Operations Repurchase (DOP) Account of a PI to enable the reversal of a repurchasettansaction in full on the Repurchase Date, the Central Bank shall withhold the payment of theRepurchase Price to the Counterparty and in addition, recover from the PI damages as set out in clausel0 above.

14. In the event of there being bids at the same rate in excess of the amount offered, the available quantumof Treasury Bills/Bonds wilt be allocated among such bidders on a 'pro-rata' basis. Accordingly, thebids at the cut off rate may be partially accepted.

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2004(xv)

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2004

15. If the Repurchase Date in respect of any repurchase transaction is a bank holiday, any obligation of aparty to such repurchase transaction arising on such day shall be carried out by such party on theimmediately succeeding business day.

16. The CBSL has the right to hold additional auctions later in the same day, as it deems necessary.

17. The CBSL reserves the right to accept or reject a bid of a PI.

B. Reverse Repurchase Transactions (RRP)

l.Tenure of Reverse Repurchase Transactions, until further notice, will be one day (overnight).

2.The MOC, after assessing the daily liquidity position in the money market, will call for quotations(bids) from PIs by 0930 hours by way of an announcement on the on-line electronic bidding systemand/or Reuter screen or any other effective means of communication. It will also announce thequantum on offer,

3.A PI who wishes to borrow under this facility should submit its bid/s to the Open Market Operations(OMO) Division of the Domestic Operations Department of the CBSL on or before 1000 hours on the

same day giving the amount and interest rate.

4. The bids should be submitted through the on-line electronic bidding system installed for this purpose.Bids by telephone will be entertained only in the event of a failure of the on-line electronic biddingsystem. Bids submitted via telephone should be confirmed by fax signed by trvo authorized officerswithin l5 minutes. The original of the fax should be sent to the Domestic Operations Department

before the close of business on the same day.

5. A PI can submit up to a maximum of three bids for each tender. The minimum amount of a bid should

be Rupees one million and bids should be in multiples of Rupees one million. Any bid at or below therepurchase rate of the CBSL will be rejected. PIs are required to submit International SecuritiesIdentification Numbers (ISINs) of securities together with their bids.

6. The results of the auction will be announced at 1030 hours on the same day via the on-line electronicbidding system and/or Reuter screen giving the total amount accepted and the Weighted Average RRP

Rate ( WARRP).

7.Each successful PI will be informed of the acceptance of its bid/s and allotment through the electronicbidding system at 1030 hours. The allotment will be made at the rates quoted by the successful bidder.

8. A confirmation of the RRP transaction to the PI will be issued electronically through the electronicbidding system within one hour after the release of results. The confirmation shall substantially be in

the form at Annexure I. The PIs are advised to promptly view the confirmation and retain a hard copyof the confirmation for their recolds. In the event a PI is unable to vierv or print the confirmation dueto a technical failure in assessing the electronic bidding system, PSD will fax a copy of theconfirmation to the PI on request.

9. The settlement of the transactions will be through the Match Trade Feed Facility available inLankaSettle. A Match Trade Feed file will be submitted to LankaSettle at or before I145 hours, on the

basis of which the system will settle the transaction by crediting the Settlement Account of the PI with

the Purchase Price against the receipt of the Purchased Securities in the Domestic Operations Reverse

Repurchase (DRP) Account of CBSL in LankaSecure. The PI is not required to submit any settlementinstructions in this regard to the system.

t0. The Purchase Price of the Treasury Bills/Bonds accepted by the CBSL will be calculated based on theOfficial Prices determined by the Central Bank for such purposes. The Official Prices of TreasuryBills/Bonds shall be determined on a daily basis based on the current market prices, taking intoconsideration market developments, Such Official Prices are recorded in LankaSecure.Il.On the sell back date (Repurchase Date), a Matched Trade Feed file will be submitted to I.ankaSettleat I100 hours, on the basis of which the system will transfer the Purchased Securities to the PIs Orvn

(xvi)Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2OO4

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2004

Account in LankaSecure, against the receipt of payment to the Settlement Account of CBSL for thesell back value (Repurchase Price) of the Purchased Securities in the same manner as outlined atclause 9 above.

l2.The sell back value (Repurchase Price) will consist of Purchased Price plus the interest componentwhich will be calculated at the rate quoted by the PI.

13. If the Repurchase Date in respect of any Reverse Repurchase transaction is a bank holiday, anyobligation of a party to a Reverse Repurchase Agreement arising on such day shall be carried out bysuch party on the immediately succeeding business day.

14. If a PI fails to honour a Reverse Repurchase transaction after acceptance of its bid/s by the CBSL, thePI shall be liable to pay to the CBSL as damages an amount equivalent to the difference between thePurchase Price and the Repurchase Price of the underlying securities computed in accordance withthese Operating Instructions.l5.In the event of a PI failing to maintain sufficient funds in its Settlement Account to pay theRepurchase Price in full on the Repurchase Date, the Central Bank shall be entitled to treat the RRPtransaction as an outright purchase by the Central Bank and in addition, recover from the PI damagesas set out in clause l4 above.

16. The Central Bank may suspend a PI from engaging in RRP transactions in the event of the failure ofsuch PI to honour a RRP transaction.

17. In the event of there being bids at the same rate in excess of the amount offered, the available quantumwill be allocated among such bidders on a 'pro-rata' basis. Accordingly, the bids at the cut off ratemay be partially accepted.

18. The CBSL reserves the right to hold additional auctions later in the day, as it deems necessary.

19. The CBSL reserves the right to accept or reject a bid of a PI.

C. Standing Facility

(a) Re-purchase Facility (RP)

l. The RP will be available on an overnight basis.

2.The PIs who wish to use the RP facility under the Standing Facility are required to inform theOMO Division of the Domestic Operations Department (DOD) by telephone or fax, the amountrequired and confirm the deal electronically by submitting the same through the facility availablein the on line electronic bidding system within 30 minutes of the deal but not later than 1400hours, the same day.

3.PSD will allocate securities at the Official Prices for the amount requested in the deal.A confirmation will be issued to the PI electronically through the electronic bidding system withinone our after the confirmation of the deal by the PI, but not later than 1500 hours the same day.The confirmation shall substantially be in the form of Annexure I. PIs are advised to promptlyview the confirmation and to retain a hard copy of the confirmation for their records. In the eventa PI is unable to view or print the confirmation due to a technical failure in accessing theelectronic bidding system, PSD will fax a copy of the confirmation to the PI on request.

4. A Matched Tlade Feed file will be submitted to LankaSettle at or before 1500 hours on the basisof which the system will settle the transaction by transferring the allocated securities to the PI'sDomestic Opelations Repurchase (DOP) Account in LankaSecure against the receipt of funds(amount accepted) for the Purchased Price of securities to the Settlement Account of the CBSL.The PI is not required to submit any settlement instruction in this regard to the system.

5.PIs should ensure that sufficient funds are available in its Settlement Account to settle thePurchase Price of securities in full. If a PI fails to settle a transaction in full. PI shall be liable to

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2004( xvii )

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2004

pay damages to the CBSL in a sum equivalent to the difference between the sale value (Purchase

Price ) and the repurchase value (Repurchase Price) calculated in accordance with these OperatingInstructions.

6. On the Repurchase Date (maturity date), a Matched Trade Feed file will be submitted to the

system at or before 0830 hours to pay the Repurchase Price of securities to the PI on receipt of

Purchased Securities to the Own Account of the CBSL in LankSecure in the same manner asoutlined in clause 4 above.

T.Repurchase Price (sell back value) will consist of the Purchase Price plus the interest componentwhich will be calculated at the prevailing repurchase rate determined by the Central Bank.

8. PIs should ensure the availability of Purchased Securities in their Domestic Operations

Repurchase (DOP) Account in LankaSecure on the Repurchase Date at the time specified in clause6 above to enable the reversal of the repurchase transaction in full. In the event of there beinginsufficient securities in the Domestic Operations Repurchase (DOP) Account of a PI to enable thereversal of the repurchase transaction in full on the Repurchase Date, the Central Bank shallwithhold the payment of the Repurchase Price to the Counterparty and in addition, recover from

the PI damages as set out in clause 5 above.

(b) Reverse Repurchase Facility (RRP)

1. The RRP will be available on an overnight basts.

2. Under the RRP, the CBSL will purchase Treasury Bill/s and/or Treasury Bond/s from PIs atan agreed price (Purchased Price) with an agreement to sell back on an agreed date at an agreedprice (Repurchase Price).

3.The PIs who wish to use the RRP facility are required to inform the OMO Division of theDomestic Operations Department by telephone or fax the details of the deal including the amountrequested. The deal should thereafter be confirmed electronically by submitting the amountrequired, details of the scripless securities, through the facility available in the on line electronic

bidding system within 30 minutes of the deal but not later than 1400 hours the same day.

4. A Confirmation of RRP deal will be issued to the PI electronically through the electronic bidding

system within one hour after the confirmation of the deal by the PI but not later than 1500 hourson the same day. The confirmation shall substantially be in the form at Annexure I. The PI is

advised to promptly view such confirmation and retain a hard copy of the confirmation for its

records. In the event a PI is unable to view or print the confirmation due to a technical failure in

accessing the bidding system, PSD will fax a copy of the confirmation to the PI on request-

5.A Matched Trade Feed file will be submitted to LankaSettle at or before l5l5 hours, on the basisof which rhe system will settle the transaction by crediting the Settlement Account of the PI for

the Purchase Price of Securities (amount accepted) against the receipt of Purchased Securities to

the Domestic Operations Reverse Repurchase (DRP) Account of CBSL in LankaSecure. The PI is

not required to submit any settlement instructions in this regard to the system.

6. The Purchase Price of the Treasury Bill/Bonds accepted by the CBSL rvill be calculated based onthe Official Prices determined by the Central Bank for such purpose. The Official Prices of

Treasury bills/bonds shall be determined on a daily basis based on the current market prices,

taking into consideration market developments. Such official Prices are recorded in LankaSecure-

7.On the sell back date, a Matched Trade Feed file will be submitted to LankaSettle at or beforeI100 hours on the basis of which the system will transfer the Purchased Securities to the PIs Own

Account in LankaSecure, against the receipt of Purchase Price to the Settlement Account of CBSLfor the sell back value (Repurchase Price) of securities following the same procedures as outlined

at clause 5 above.

8.The sell back value (Repurchase Price) rvilI consist of Purchase Price plus the interest component

which will be calculated at the prevailin-e reverse repulchase rate determined b1' ths CBSI-.

( xviii )Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2OO4

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2004

9' If the sell back date (Repurchase Rate) for any Reverse Repulchase transaction, after entering intoa confirmed deal, it is liable to pay to the CBSL as damages the difference between the purchasePrice and the Repurchase Price of the underlying securities computed in terms of these OperatingInstructions.

l0' If a PI fails to complete a Reverse Repurchase transaction, after entering into a confirmed deal, itis liable to pay to the CBSL as damages the difference between the Purchase price and theRepurchase Price of the underlying securities computed in terms of these Operations Instructions.ll.In the event of a PI failing to maintain sufficient funds in its Settlement Account to pay rheRepurchase Price on the Repurchase Date, the Central Bank-shall be entitled to treat the RRptransaction as an outright purchase and in addition, recover from the PI damages calculated asprovided in clause l0 above.

l2.The Central Bank may suspend a PI from engaging in RRP transactions in the event of the failureof such PI to honour a Reserve Repurchase transactlons.

D. Outright Sale of Treasury Bills or Treasury Bondsl.The CBSL will announce when necessary on the on-line electronic bidding system and/or Reuterscreen that it intends to sell Treasury Bills/Bonds giving the amount and details of the securities to besold and call for quotations (bids) frbm the PI. Quotations are accepted between 1300 hours and 1400hours on the date of auction.

2. A Pl who wishes to purchase any Treasury Bills/Bonds from CBSL shall submit up to a maximum ofsix bids containing the face value of the Treasury Bills/Bonds to be purchased, the required maturityperiod of Treasury Bills/Bonds to be purchased, interest rate (yield rate) and price expected on orbefore 1400 hours to the OMO Division of the Domestic Operations Department rhrough the on-lineelectronic bidding system- Only in the event of a failure of the electronic bidding system, bids may besubmitted in writing within 15 minutes, but not later than 1400 hours. No bids will be entertainedthereafter under any circumstances.

3. Minimum amount of a bid should be Rupees one million and bids should be in multiples of Rupeesone million.

4' PIs whose bids are accepted will be informed of such acceptance and the relevant sale price ofsecurities through the electronic biddin-9 system, by fax or telephone by 1430 hours on the same day.The settlement would be on the next business day.

5. On the settlement date a Matched Trade Feed file will be submitted to LankaSettle at or before 0g30hours on the basis of which the system will settle the transaction by transferring securities sold to therespective Own Accounts of the successful bidders against the receipt of funds to the Se.ttlenrentAccount of the CBSL for the discounted value of the securities sold.

6. The discounted value of securities sold will be calculated on the basis of the ratelprice of TreasuryBills or Treasury Bonds as the case may be, quoted by respective successful bidder and the maturitvdate of the Treasuly Bill/Bond.

7. The acceptance by the CBSL of a bid of a PI is binding on rhe PI and the failure ro honour rhetransaction (purchase by PI) will render the PI liable to pay damages to the CBSL equivalent to theinterest component on the purchase price for the remaining period to maturity at the rate quoted by thePI' Such amount shall be debited to the PI's Settlement Accounr with the CBSL on the sertlement date.8.In the event of there being bids in excess of the amount offered at the same rate, the available quantumlvould be allocated among such bidders on a 'pro-rata' basis.

9.The cBSL reserves the right ro accept or reject a bid of a pL

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2OO4(xix)

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2004

Outright Purchase of Treasury Bills/BondsL The CBSL will announce, when necessary, on the on-line electronic bidding system and/or Reuter

screen that it intends to buy Treasury Bills/Bonds giving the amounts and maturities. Quotations are

accepted between 1300 hours and 1400 hours on the date of auction.

Z. The PIs who wish to sell any Treasury Bills/Bonds of the maturities indicated by CBSL should submittheir bids to the Open Market Operations (OMO) Division of the Domestic Operations Department of

the CBSL on or before 1400 hours on the same day with the following details;i. Face value of Treasury Bills/Bonds to be soldii. Coupon Rate and Coupon Date, in the case of Treasury Bondsiii. Interest Rate (Yield Rate) and Price expecteditt. Maturity dates of Treasury Bills/Bonds offered for sale.

3. The pls should submit their bids through the on-line electronic bidding system. In the event of afailure of the on-line electronic bidding system, bids may be submitted by telephone and confirmed inwriting within I5 minutes. No bids will be entertained thereafter under any circumstances.

4. The PIs may submit up to a minimum of six bids. Maximum amount of a bid should be Rupees onemillion and bids should be in multiples of Rupees one million.5. The PIs whose officers are accepted will be informed of such acceptance through the electronic

bidding system by 1430 hours on the same day. The settlement would be on the next business day'

6. A Matched Trade Feed file will be submitted to LankaSettle at or before 0830 hours on the basis of

which the system will credit the respective Settlement Accounts of successful bidders in RTGS for the

purchased value of securities against the receipt of Purchased Securities in the Own Account of the

CBSL in LankaSecure.1. The acceptance by the CBSL of a bid of a PI is binding on the PI and the failure to honour the

transaction (sale by PI) will render the PI liable to pay damages to the CBSL equivalent to the interest

component on the sale value for the remaining period to maturity at the rate quoted by the PI. Such

amount shall be debited to the PI's Settlement Account with the CBSL on the settlement data.

8. In the event of there being bids in excess of the amount offered at the same rate, the available quantum

would be allocated among such bidders on a 'pro-rata' basis.g. The CBSL reserves the right to accept or reject any bid for a sale of Treasury Bills/Treasury Bonds

by a PI.

Director

Domestic Operations Department

(xx)Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2004

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2O04

Circular No. : 35 / 01 / 005 | 0006 | 05

To : Al,l Licertsecl Conunercial Banks and Printury Deulers

Domestic Operations Department27 January 2OO4

INTRA.DAY LIOUIDITY FACILITY flLF)AGAINST SCRIPLESS GOVERNMENT SECURITIES ON LANKASETTLE

As provided for in the System Rules of 'LankaSettle', the Central Bank of Sri Lanka (Central Bank)may, at its discretion, provide funds under Intra-day Liquidity Facility (ILF) to eligible ParticipatingInstitutions (PIs) on LankaSettle to facilitate smooth operation of the Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS)System. Ordinarily, all Direct Participants on LankaSettle other than Designated Non-Dealer Bidders areeligible for ILF.

The Operating Instructions pertaining to the provision of ILF by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka (CentralBank) against scripless Government securities are outlined below. These Operating Instructions come intoeffect on 2td February, 2004 and may be amended or varied by the Central Bank from time to time withreasonable notice to the PIs.

1. Funds under ILF are provided free of charge upon the PI transferring eligible securities to theCentral Bank in accordance with these Operating Instructions on the condition that the saidsecurities shall be repurchased by the PI by repaying the outstanding ILF on or before the timespecified for repayment of ILF in these Operating Instructions.

2. In order to become eligible for ILF, all eligible PIs should sign an ILF Agreement in a prescribedform with the Central Bank.

3. The Central Bank shall determine, at its discretion, the types of Eligible Securities that will beaccepted as -security for ILF. At present, all Scripless Treasury Bills and Scripless Treasury Bondsissued by the Government of Sri Lanka shall be eligible to be used as security for ILF.4. A PI who wishes to obtain ILF should reposition a sufficient quantity of Eligible Securities in itsParticipant's ILF Account in LankaSecure at or before 4.00 p.m. on the previous Business Day. TheCentral Bank will provide ILF only to the extent of the value (determined as provided in clause 6below) of Eligible Securities available in the participant's ILF Account at such time-5. At the beginning of each Business Day, Eligible Securities available in the Participant's ILFAccount will be automatically transferred to the Central Bank's ILF Account in LankaSecure andthe value of Eligible Securities calculated based on the Official Prices determined by the CentralBank for such purpose will be credited to each PI's Settlement Account in the RTGS at or before8.00 a.m.

6. The Official Prices of Eligible Securities referred to in clause 5 above shall be determined by theCentral Bank on a daily basis, based on the current market prices and taking into account marketdevelopments. Such Official Prices are recorded in LankaSecure. A list of such Official Prices willbe available with the Domestic Operations Department (DOD) of the Central Bank for theinformation of the PIs on request.

7 . In exceptional circumstances, the Central Bank has the light to revise the Official Prices during theBusiness Day and revalue the securities provided as collateral based on the revised Official Prices.If such revaluation results in a PI having to replenish the securities provided as collateral, theDomestic Operations Departrnent shall request the PI to make such replenishment by transferringadditional Eligible Securities to the Central Bank's ILF Account to the value derermined by theCentral Bank. In such event, the PI shall transfer such additional securities to the Central Bank'sILF Account within I hour of such request.

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2004(xxi)

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2OO4

In the event a PI being unable to provide replenishment as required by the Central Bank, the CentralBank reserves the right to debit the PI's Settlement Account in RTGS to the extent of the unsecuredamount of the funds granted under ILF.

The Central Bank may, at its discretion, at the request of a PI, permit additional drawdowns of ILFduring the Business Day at designated times in the event that the ILF obtained at the start of theBusiness Day is insufficient to meet its payment obligations, subject to a maximum of three (3)additional drawdowns per PI per day. Designated times for additional drawdowns are 10.00 o.ffi.,12.00 noon and 2.00 p.m.

Requests for additional drawdowns should be made to the Director/Domestic OperationsDepartment of the Central Bank by telephone at or before 1.30 p.m. and it such additionaldrawdowns are permitted, the PI must reposition an adequate amount of Eligible Securities in itsParticipant's ILF Account in LankaSecure to be used as secur-ity tbr such additional drawdowns ofILF at or before the applicable designated time.

10. Upon receipt of such a request the Central Bank will arrange for such additional drawdown of ILFat the applicable designated time/s. The Central Bank reserves the right to recover the cost ofproviding such additional drawdowns from the PI.

PIs may return the funds borrowed under ILF fully or partially and regain whole or part of thesecurities provided as collateral before the time specified tor repayment of ILF in these OperatingInstructions by prior agreement with the Central Bank. PIs who wish to return the funds borrowedunder ILF before the specified time should inform the OMO Division of the Domestic OperationsDepartment the details of such return, i.e., the amount and the details of securities, by telephclne ator before 2.00 p.m. Such request should immediately be followed by u rvritten confirmation byfacsimile duly signed by two authorized officers.

A Participant shall be permitted to repay funds borrowed under ILF in whole or in part during theBusiness Day (i.c., before the time specified for repayment of ILF in these Operating Instructions)only once in each Business Day.

Upon receipt of such confirmation, the Domestic Operations Department will transmit the request toDirector/Payments and Settlements Department to arrange for the recovery of whole or part of theoutstanding funds under ILF and to return the relevant portion of the underlying securities. The

standard DVP procedure for the reversal of a reverse repurchase transaction will be followed in

respect of such repayments, i.e., Payment and Settlements Department will input a DVP message

and the PI shall input a RVP message at or before 2.30 p.m. which will be matched by the systemand settled.

13. Substitution of securities provided as collateral for ILF shall not be permitted.

14. All outstanding ILF balances should be settled by the PIs at or before 3.15 p.m. on each BusinessDay. For this purpose, PIs mLrst ensure that sufficient funds are available in their SettlementAccounts in the RTGS at the specified time to enable the Centlal Bank to recover any outstandingILF.

15. The process of recovery of outstanding ILF is automatically initiated by the system at 3.15 p.m.It will generate returns of securities from Central Bank's ILF Account to the Participant's ILFAccount. A settlement request will be submitted to RTGS on DVP terms which will be matchedwith an instruction to transfer securities from the Central Bank's ILF Account to the Participant'sILF Account. The reversal of ILF will be done at the original price and original transaction value.

I6. If a PI fails, for any reason rvhatsoever, to settle in full to the Central Bnnk the amount outstandingunder the ILF at the time specified in clause l4 above, the PI shall be deemed to be in default forthe full sum so outstanding and shall become liable to pay default interest as set out in clause l8

belorv.

8

9

11.

t2

( xxii )Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2OO4

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2004

17. Where a PI is deemed to be in default as set out in (16) above, such PI should repay in full theamount in default before the close of business on the next Business Day.For this purpose, such PImust submit a RVP message to the System at or before l2 noon on the next Business Day whichwill be matched by a DVP message submitted to the System by the OMO Settlements Division ofthe Payments and Settlements Department. The PI should ensure the availability of sufficient fundsin its Settlenrent Account for the repayment in full of the amount in default on or before the close ofbusiness on the next Business Day.

In the event the PI fails to settle in full the amount in default before the end of business on the nextBusiness Day, the Central Bank shall retain the securities against which such funds were providedand deal with them in its own right.

18. On the first occasion of such default the PI shall be charged default interest at a rate equivalent tothe Bank Rate announced by the Central Bank from time to time and on each succeeding occasionof default during a calendar year, such default interest rate shall be increased by 100 basis points,provided that where such default occurs more than once in a one month period the Central Bankshall have the right to retain the securities against which ILF was granted and to deal with them asthe Central Bank deems fit, in addition to the right to charge default interest as stipulated in thisclause. In the event of repeated default, the Central Bank may withdraw the availability of ILF tothe PI for a period of time determined by the Central Bank.

Notwithstanding the other provisions of these Operating Instructions and notwithstanding the factthat default has not occurred more than once in a one month period, the Central Bank may, at itssole discretion, taking into consideration the circumstances of a default, decide to retain thesecurities and to deal with them as the Central Bank deems fit.

Notwithstanding the other provisions of these Operating Instructions, the Central Bank may at itssole discretion, taking into consideration the circumstances of a default, withdraw the availability ofILF to a PI permanently or for a period of time determined by the Central Bank.

Director

Domestic Operations Department

19.

20.

Circular No. : 35 / 0f / 005 | 00061 06

To : AII Commerciol Bsnks and Printary Dealers

Domestic Operations Department27 Ianuary 2004

OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS (OMO) OF THE CENTR.AL BANK OF SRI LANKA

With the implementation of LankaSecure, the Scripless Securities Settlement System (SSSS) andCentral Depository System (CDS) on 2nd February, 2004, the Central Bank of Sri Lanka will commence theconduct of its Open Market Operations in Scripless government securities held in LankaSecure. The CentralBank holdings of government securities will be demateriahzed and available in scripless form with effectfrom 2nd February,20O4. Therefore, all repurchase transactions and outright sales will be conducted entirelyin scripless securities with effect from the said date.

However, as it may take some time for the participating institutions to have their entire stock ofgovernment securities dematerialized, the Central Bank rvill entertain deals for reverse repurchasetransactions and outright purchases in scrip securities during an interim period of three months until30th April,2004. Thereafter, transactions under OMO rvill be entirely in scripless government securities.

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2004( xxiii )

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2004

During the interim period the following additional instructions would be applicable:a. The Operating Instructions on Open Market Operations issued by the Central Bank of Sri Lankadated 03.09.2003 shall apply in respect of the Reverse Repurchase transactions in scrip securities.b. The Operating Instructions on Open Market Operations of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka inScripless Government Securities issued by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka dated 27.0L.2004 shallapply in respect of Reverse Repurchase transactions in scripless securities.c. For reverse repurchase transactions under the auction system, a PI is permitted to submit amaximum of six bids. Bids could be for securities in scrip form and"/or scripless form. However,PIs are not allowed to include both scrip and scripless securities in a single bid.d. For reverse repurchase transactions under the standing facility, securities in both scrip andscripless form are not allowed to be included in a single deal. PIs should enter into separate dealsin respect of transactions in securities in scrip and scripless form.

Director

Domestic Operations Department

Circular No. : 35 / 01/ 005 10006107

To : All Licensed Commercial Banks and Primarv Dealers

Domestic Operations Department3 May 2004

ON LANKASETTLE

This has reference to my circular No. 35/01/005/0006/05 dated 27 January 2004 on the above OperatingInstructions.

Clause 16 of the said Operating Instructions is hereby amended with immediate effect to read asfollows:

L6. If a PI fails, for any reason whatsoever, to settle in full to the Central Bank the amountoutstanding under the ILF before the close of business of LankaSecure on the same day, the PIshall be deemed to be in default for the full sum so outstanding and shall become liable to paydefault interest as set out in clause l8 below. Such default interest shall be debited to the PI'sSettlement Account with the CBSL on the next business day.

Director

Domestic Operations Department

( xxiv )Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2OO4

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2004

Circular No. : 35 | 0l / 005 / 0006 / 08

To : AII Licensecl Conunercial Bar*s and Printorv Dealers

Domestic Operations Department3 May 2004

OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS ON OPEN MARKET OPERATIONS OF THECENTRAL BANK OF SRI LANKA IN SCRIPLESS GOVERNMENT SECURITIES

This has reference to my Circular No. 35/01/005/0006104 dated 27 January 2004 on the above OperatingInstructions.

Clauses l0 and l3 of item A [Repurchase Transactions (RP) under the Auction System], clause l5 ofitem B [Reverse Repurchase Transactions (RRP)], clauses 5 and 8 of item C(a) [Repurchase Facility (RP)]and clause l1 of item C(b) [Reverse Repurchase Facility (RRP)] and clause 7 of item D [Outright Sale ofTreasury Bills and Treasury Bondsl and clause 7 of item titled Outright Purchase of Treasury Bills/ TreasuryBonds of the said Operating Instructions are hereby amended with immediate effect to read as follows:A. Repurchase Transactions (RP) under the Auction System

10. Successful PIs should ensure that sufficient funds are available in their Settlement Account inLankaSettle to settle the Purchase Price of securities in full at or before 1245 hours. If a PI fails tosettle a RP transaction in full, before the close of business of LankaSecure on the same day, the PIshall be liable to pay damages to the CBSL in a sum equivalent to the difference between the salevalue (Purchase Price) and the repurchase value (Repurchase Price) calculated as provided in theseOperating Instructions. Such damages shall be debited to the PI's Settlement Account with the CBSLon the next business day. If the transaction involves securities carrying more than one InternationalSecurities Identification Number (ISIN), each such ISIN will be treated as a separate RP transaction,for the purposes of this clause.

13. PIs should ensure the availability of Purchased Securities in their Domestic Operations Repurchase(DOP) Account in LankaSecure on the Repurchase Date at the time specified in clause I I above toenable the reversal of a repurchase transaction in full. In the event of there being insufficientsecurities in the Domestic Operations Repurchase (DOP) Account of a PI to enable the reversal of arepurchase transaction in full on the Repurchase Date at the specified time, the PI shall be liable topay damages to the CBSL as set out in clause l0 above. Such damages shall be debited to the PI'sSettlement Account with the CBSL on the next business day.

B. Reverse Repurchase Transactions (RRP)

15. In the event of a PI failing to maintain sufficient funds in its Settlement Account to pay theRepurchase Price in full, before the close of business of LankaSecure on the Repurchase Date, theCentral Bank shall be entitled to treat the RRP transaction as an outright purchase by the CentralBank and in addition, recover from the PI damages calculated as set out in clause l4 above. Suchdamages shall be debited to the PI's Settlement Account with the CBSL on the next business day. Ifthe transaction involves securities carrying more than one ISIN, each such ISIN will be treated as asepflrate RRP transaction, for the purposes of this clause.

C. Standing Facility(a) Repurchase Facility (RP)5. PIs should ensure that sufficient funds are available in its Settlement Account to settle thePurchase Price of securities in full. If a PI fails to settle a transaction in full, before the close ofbusiness of LankaSecure on the same day, PI shall be liable to pay damages to the CBSL in asum equivalent to the difference between the sale value (Purchase Price) and the repurchase

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annuaf Report - 2004(xxv)

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2004

value (Repurchase Price) calculated in accordance with these Operating Instructions. Suchdamages shall be debited to the PI's Settlement Account with the CBSL on the next businessday. If the transaction involves securities carrying more than one ISIN, each such ISIN will betreated as a separate RP transaction, for the purposes of this clause.8. PIs should ensure the availability of Purchased Securities in their Dornestic OperationsRepurchase (DOP) Account in LankaSecure on the Repurchase Date at the time specified inclause 6 above to enable the reversal of a repurchase transaction in full. In the event of therebeing insufficient securities in the Domestic Operations Repurchase (DOP) Account of a PI toenable the reversal of a repurchase transaction in full on the Repurchase Date at the specifiedtime, the PI shall be liable to pay damages to the CBSL as set out in clause 5 above. Suchdamages shall be debited to the PI's Settlement Account with the CBSL on the next businessday.(b) Reverse Repurchase Facility (RRP)

11. In the event of a PI failing to maintain sufficient funds in its Settlement Account to pay theRepurchase Price before the close of business of LankaSecure on the Repurchase Date, theCentral Bank shall be entitled to treat the RRP transaction as an outright purchase and inaddition, recover from the PI damages calculated as provided in clause l0 above. Such damagesshall be debited to the PI's Settlement Account with the CBSL on the next business day. If thetransaction involves securities carrying more than one ISIN, each such ISIN will be treated as aseparate RRP transaction, for the purposes of this clause.

D. Outright Sale of Treasury Bills or Treasury Bonds7. The acceptance by the CBSL of a bid of a PI is binding on the PI and the failure to honour thetransaction (purchase by PI) before the close of business of LankaSecure on the settlement date willrender the PI liable to pay damages to the CBSL equivalent to the interest component on the purchaseprice for the remaining period to maturity at the rate quoted by the PI. Such amount shall be debitedto the PI's Settlement Account with the CBSL on the next business day following the settlement date.

Outright Purchase of Treasury Bills/ Treasury Bonds7. The acceptance by the CBSL of a bid of a PI is binding on the PI and the failure to honour thetransaction (sale by PI) before the close of business of LankaSecure on the settlement date willrender the PI liable to pay damages to the CBSL equivalent to the interest component on the salevalue for the remaining period to maturity at the rate quoted by PI. Such amount shall be debited tothe PI's Settlement Account with the CBSL on the next business day followinc the settlement date.

Director

Domestic Operations Department

( xxvi )Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2OO4

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2004

Circular No. : 35 / 01 / 005 / 0010 / 01

To : All Licensed Commercial Banks

Domestic Operations Department22 October 2OO4

In view of the increased import expenditure arising out of high oil prices, the Monetary Board of theCentral Bank has decided to adopt a temporary monetary measure in containing the increase in imports.

Accordingly, in terms of the provisions of Section 103 of the Monetary Law Act (Cap 422 of the CLE),the Monetary Board has made order directing commercial banks that with effect from the close of business on22 October 2004 letters of credit (LCs) should not be opened by commercial banks for the importation of thevehicles specified in Schedule A (attached) unless such LCs are covered by a minimum cash margin of100 per cent deposited with the LC opening banks at the time such LCs are opened.

In the case of existing letters of credit covering the importation of the goods mentioned in Schedule A,no increase in the value of such letters of credit should be permitted by banks except on the terms prescribedin the above paragraph.

Commercial banks are required to comply with the direction of the Monetary Board.

D i recto r/D o m e st ic O perat ion sAuthorised Signatory ofthe Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka

Schedule A

List of Items Requiring 100 per cent Margin on Letters of Credit

I

H.S.lleading

II

H.S. CodeIII

Description

87.02Motor vehicles for the transport of tcn or more persons, including the driver.

8702.tOWith compression-ignition internal combustion piston engine (diesel or semi-diesel)

8702.10.01Ten seated passenger vans of the Nissan Patrol, Mitsubishi Pajero. Toyota Land Cruiser,Range Rover and similar type of vehicles not more than three years old.

8702.10.02Ten seated passenger vans of the Nissan Patrol, Mitsubishi Pajero, Toyota Land Cruiser,Range Rover and similar type of vehicles more than three years old.

8702. r0.03'Other with a normal seating capacity of not more than fifteen including the driver not morethan five years old.

8702.10.04Other with a normal seatin-e capacity of not more than fifteen including the driver more thanfive years old.

8702.90Other

8702.90.0lTen seated passenger vans of the Nissan Patrol, Mitsubishi Pajero, Toyota Land Cruiser,Range Rover and similar type of vehicles not more than three years old.

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2OO4( xxvii )

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2Q04

8702.90.02Ten seated passenger vans of the Nissan Patrol. Mitsubishi Pajero, Toyota Land Cruiser,

Ran-qe Rover and similar type of vehicles more than three years old.

87.03Motor cars and other motor velriclesthan the items described under HSwa-qons and racing cars.

principally designed for theHeadine 8702 of Customstransport of persons (otherGuide), including station

8703. l0Vchicles specially designed for travellin-q on snow; golf cars and similar vehicles.

8703.10.01Not more than three and half (3rl.) years old.

8703.10.02More than three and half (3'l") years old.

Other vehicles, with spark-ignition internal combustion reciprocating piston engine.

8703.21Of cylinder capacity not exceeding 1,000 cc.

8703.2r.05Other spec alized transport vehicles not more than three and half (3tlr) years old.

8703.2r.06Other specialized transport vehicles more than three and half (3'lr) years old.

8703.21.t2Other not more than three and half (3rl,) years old.

8703.21.r3Other more than three and half (3'l,) years old.

8703.22Of a cylinder capacity exceeding 1,000 cc but not exceeding 1,500 cc.

8703.22.07Other not more than three and half (3rl") years old.

8703.22.08Other more than three and half (3'l ) years old.

8703.23Of a cylinder capacity exceeding 1,500 cc but not exceeding 3000 cc.

8703.23.07Other of a cylinder capacity not exceeding 2,000 cc, not more than three and half (3'l.) yearsold.

8703.23.08Other of a cylinder capacity not exceeding 2,000 cc, more than three and half (3'lr) years old.

8703.23.10Other not more than three and half (3'l,) years old.

8703.23.r1Other more than three and half (3rl") years old.

8703.24Of a cylinder capacity excceding 3,000 cc.

8703.24.01Other not more than three and half (3t1") years old.

8703.24.08Other more than three and half (3rl,) years old.

Other vehicles, with compression-ignition internal combustion piston enginc (diesel or semi-diesel)

8703.31Of a cylinder capacity not exceeding 1,500 cc.

8703.31.07Motor cars including station wagons and racing cars not more than three and half (3'/=) yearsold.

8703.31.08Motor cars including station wagons and racing cars more than three and half (3rl,) years old.

8703.3 l. l0Van-type veh cles not more than five years old.

8703.31.l lVan-type veh cles more than five years old.

8703.31.t2Other not more than three and half (3tl,) years old.

8703.3 l. 13Other more than three and half (3r/,) years old.

8703.32Of a cylinder capacity exceeding 1,500 cc but not excecding 2.500 cc.

8703.32.05Van-type vehicles not more than five years old.

8703.32.06Van-type vehicles more than five years old.

8703.32.01Motor cars including station wagons and racing cars of a cylinder capacity not exceeding2,000 cc not more than three and half (3rl") years old.

8703.32.08Motor cars including station wagons and racing cars of a cylinder capacity not exceeding2,000 cc more than three and half (-jr/,) years old.

8703.32. r0Other of a cylinder capacity not exceeding 2,000 cc not more than three and half (3'/r) yearsold.

8703,32,I IOther of a cylinder capacity uot exccedin-e 2,000 cc more than three and half (3'/,) years old.

8703.32.12Motor cars including station wagons and racing cars of a cylinder capacity excceding 2,000cc not more than three and half (3'l,) years old.

8703.32. l3Motor cars including station wagons and racin-e cars of a cylinder capacity exceeding 2,000cc more than three and half (3tl,) years old.

( xxviii )Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2004

Part fllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2OO4

8703.32.t4Other not more than three and half (3'lr) years old.

8703.32.t5Other more than three and half (3'lr) years old.

8703.33Of a cylinder capacity excecdin-e 2.500 cc,

8703.33.05Motor cars including station wagons and racing cars not more than three and half (3rl,) yearsold.

8703.33.06Motor cars including station wagons and racing cars more than three and half (3'l,) years old.

8703.33.O7Van-type vehicles not more than five years old.

8703.33.08Van-type vehicles more than five years old.

8703.33. | 0Other not more than three and half (3rl") yeals old

8703.33.1 lOther more than three and half ( 3'l.) years old

8703.90Other

8703.90 .01Electric, not more than three and half (3'l") years old

8703.90 .02Electric, more than three and half (3rl,) years old

8703.90.03Other not more than three and half (31/,) years old

8703,90.04Other more than three and half ( 3'l,) years old

87.04Motor vehicles for the transport of goods

Other, with compression-ignition internal combustion piston engine (diesel or semi-diesel)

8704.21g.v.w. not exceeding five (5) tonnes:

8704.2t.OrJeep type vans of a g.v.w. not exceeding 3,000 kg. not more than five years old.

8704.2r.02Jeep type vans of a g.v.w. not exceeding 3,000 kg. more than five years old.

8704.21.12Other not more than five years old

8704.2r.r3Other more than five years old

Other, with spark-ignition internal combustion piston engines.

8704.31g.v.w. not exceeding five (5) tonnes

8704.3 l.0lJeep type vans of a g.v.w. not exceeding 3,000 kg. not more than three years old.

8704.3t.O2Jeep type vans of a g.v.w. not exceeding 3,000 kg. more than three years old.

8704.3 l . l0Other, not more than five years old.

8704.3 l. I IOther. more than five vears old.

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2004( xxix )

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2OO4

Ref. : 06 / 05 l0l | 2004Dept. of Exchange ControlCentral Bank of Sri LankaP.O. Box 883Colombo l.

6 Januarv 2004Ope rot in g lnstructions toAutlrcriseel Dealers irt Foreign Exclrcmge

Dear Sirs,

RELEASE OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE TO GEM DEALERS

As a measure to develop the Gem and Jewellery Industry in Sri Lanka, which has been identified as a"thrust" industry, it has been decided to offer a special foreign exchange facility to Gem Dealers to purchaseand import rough gem stones from Madagascar, out of foreign exchange carried on their person whentravelling to Madagascar for payment in advance of import.

Therefore, Authorised Dealers are hereby permitted to sell foreign exchange upto US $ 15,000(of which currency notes may be issued only upto a maximum of US $ 5,000 and the balance in the form ofTravellers' Cheques or a bank draft) to a registered gem dealer who is proceeding to Madagascar, for meetinghis cost of purchasing gems and personal expenses in Madagascar, on production of a letter ofrecommendation from the National Gem and Jewellery Authority (NGJA) to the Authorised Dealer issuingthe foreign exchange recommending his request for exchange.

When releasing foreign exchange as above, the Authorised Dealer to whom the recommendation of theNGJA is addressed should obtain an undertaking from the gem dealer to the effect that -(a) he would bring into Sri Lanka, gems purchased out of exchange released within 45 days of therelease of exchange, and submit a self prepared invoice in triplicate giving the details of thequantity and value of rough gem stones so brought into Sri Lanka to the Sri Lanka Customs forendorsement at the time of his arrival (one such invoice duly endorsed by the Sri Lanka Customsshould be submitted to the Authorised Dealer from whom foreign exchange was purchased, whileanother should be submitted to the NGJA, within 60 days of release of foreign exchange);(b) he would bring into the country all unutilized foreign exchange purchased by him and surrendersuch foreign exchange to an Authorised Dealer within seven days of his arrival. (Evidence to thiseffect should be presented to the Authorised Dealer from whom foreign exchange was purchased);(c) he would also submit a completed statement of accounts in the format at Annex I to theAuthorised Dealer who issued foreign exchange, within 60 days of release of foreign exchange,giving details of foreign exchange purchased from the Authorised Dealer and utilization of suchforeign exchange for the purposes of acquiring rough gem stones and for personal expenditureseparately, together with the evidence of surrendering unutilized foreign exchange to anAuthorised Dealer.All instances of gem dealers failing to comply with any of the above undertakings and requirementsshould be reported by the Authorised Dealer from whom foleign exchange was purchased, to the ExchangeControl Department of the Central Bank and to the NGJA within a period of three months from the date ofrelease of exchange.

Yours faithfully

Sgd./ H. A. G. Hettiarachchi

Cortt rol I er of E-rc lrurt g e

(xxx)Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2OO4

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2OO4

Annex I

Statement of Accounts in respect of Foreign Currencies purchased forthe purpose of travel to Madagascar for Purchase of Gems

PurposeAmount of Foreign CurrencyPurchasedAmount of Foreign CurrencyExpendedUnutilizedBalance

Purchase of Gems

Personal Expenses

Total

. Date of Purchase of Fordi_gn Currency :. Authorizcd Dealer fiom whom Foreign Currency was purchascd :. Date of Departure to Madagascar :. Date of Arrival to Sri Lanka :. Date of Surrendering of Unutilized Foreign Currency :. Authorized Dealer to whom Foreign Currency was sold :(Evidence of Surrendering foreign currency is attached).

I certify that all the above information is true and correct.

Signature of Gem Dealer

Ref. : 06 / 05 l02l 2004Dept. of Exchange ControlCentral Bank of Sri LankaP.O. Box 883Colombo l.

9 March 2004Operatirtg Instructio,ts to all Authorised Dealers

Dear Sirs,

MONITORING SCHEME FOR IMPORTS MADE ON ADVANCE PAYMENT TERMS

The attention of all Authorized Dealers are drawn to the regulations under the Imports and Exports(Control) Act published in the Gctzete Notification No. l3l9l28 dated l8 December 2003 whereby rhe rimeperiod given for importing goods on advance payment terms has been extended from 30 to 90 days.

With this relaxation it has become even more necessary that a proper monitoring scheme be put in placeto ensure that imports are made in accordance with the regulation.

Accordingly, Authorized Dealers are hereby requested to follow the under mentioned procedure whenselling foreign exchange for advance payment for import of goods.(1) Authorised Dealers should obtain Form I duly perfected by the importer in duplicate along with aproforma invoice and an undertaking in the attached format to the effect that he would subrnitevidence of the import of goods (i.e., a copy of the commercial invoice and a copy of the CustomsDeclaration both duly stamped by Customs) within 90 days from the date of the sale of foreignexchange for the advance payment;

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2004( xxxi )

Part lllMalor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2004

(2) A copy of the proforma invoice and a copy of the undertaking should be attached to the original ofForm I which has to be forwarded to the Exchange Control Department in terms of our OperatingInstructions No. ECl07l98 (MU) dated 24December 1998;(3) A duplicate of Form I together with a copy of the invoice and a copy of the undertaking should beretained with the Authorised Dealer until the importer produces the documentary evidence inconfirmation of import of goods within the agreed period of 90 days. Even after the submission ofevidence, the Authorised Dealer should retain copies of such relevant clearance documents for afurther period of at least 3 months for a post check by this Department, if necessary;(4) If an importer fails to produce documentary evidence in confirmation of import of goods withinthe agreed 90 day period, details of such importer should be reported to us for monitoringpurposes within 2 weeks from the expiry of the agreed 90 day period.

Yours faithfully

Sgd./ H. A. G. Hettiarachchi

Controller of Exchange

Annex I

Manager

I / We hereby undertake to submit to you within 90 days of the date given below, a copy of thecommercial invoice and a copy of the Customs Declaration both duly stamped by Customs in respect of theimport of goods for which payment has been made in advance by Draft / Mail Transfer / Telegraphic Transferbearing Ref. No.

Signature of Importer

Date

( xxxii )Central Bank of SriLanka Annual Report -2OO4

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2004

Ref. : 0610410312004Dept. of Exchange ControlCentral Bank of Sri LankaP.O. Box 883Colombo L

l6 July 2004To : Prinnrlt Dealers Appointed us Designntecl Agents forSri Lanka Developntent Bonds andAll Autltorisecl Dealers in Foreign Exclmnge

Dear Sirs,SRI LANKA DEVELOPMENT BONDS (SLDBS)

Permission is hereby granted in terms of Section l7 of the Exchange Control Act, to both AuthorisedDealers in foreign exchange and Primary Dealers who have been appointed by the Superintendent of PublicDebt of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka (Superintendent of Public Debt) as designated agents for the purposeof purchasing and marketing Sri Lanka Development Bonds (SLDBs) issued by the Government of Sri Lanka(Government) to acquire, hold or transfer SLDBs on which capital and interest are payable in U.S. Dollars.2. Permission is also hereby granted to such designated agents to maintain the following two specialaccounts in U.S. Dollars for the said purpose, with a commercial bank appointed as an Authorised Dealer inforeign exchange (Authorised Dealers).(t) A U.S. Dollar interest bearing account titled 'Sri Lanka Development Bond Investment Account'(SLDBIA) maintained on behalf of the Government to credit funds payable to the Government andreceived from the categories of investors specified in paragraph 3, who directly purchase SLDBsfrom the Government. The funds in this account belong to the Government;(ii) A U.S. Dollar account titled 'Dollar Account for Bond Investment' (DABI) which may bemaintained on an interest bearing basis (in the case of such designated agent who is an AuthorisedDealer in foreign exchange, the maintenance of this account is not mandatory), for the purpose ofpurchasing SLDBs from the Government and dealing in SLDBs with the categories of investorsspecified in paragraph 3.

3. Categories of Investors(t) Citizens of foreign states whether resident in Sri Lanka or outside Sri Lanka;(rt) Citizens of Sri Lanka who have made their permanent abode outside Sri Lanka;(iii) Citizens of Sri Lanka who have proceeded outside Sri Lanka to take up employment or to set up inbusiness or in a profession and are residing abroad;(iv) Bodies corporate or unincorporate established under the laws of a country other than Sri Lanka;(r,) Companies who have entered into agreements in terms of Section l7 of the Board of Investment ofSri Lanka Law No.4 of 1978 with full exemption from the provisions of the Exchange Control Actprovided that all purchases of SLDBs are made against debits to foreign currency accountsmaintained only for the purpose of crediting earnings from exports of such companies.

4.

The credits and debits to this account shall be confined to the following :-(i) Creclits

Remittances received in US Dollars from investors specified in paragraph 3 above for the purchase ofSLDBs from the Government.

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2004( xxxiii )

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2OO4

(ii) Debits(a) To make payment to the Government for purchasing SLDBs by investors specified in paragraph3 above. (This payment should be made in accordance with instructions given by theSuperintendent of Public Debt and is payable to the 'Public Debt Subscription US Dollar'Account' (PDSDA) maintained by the Superintendent of Public Debt with the Central Bank ofSri Lanka);(b) To effect remittances by way of refund on the instructions of the Superintendent of Public Debtto investors specified in paragraph 3 above;(c) For any other purpose on the instructions of the Superintendent of Public Debt.

Note : The monies received into this account should be transferred to the Government strictlv inaccordance with instructions given by Superintendent of Public Debt.

5.

The credits and debits to the account should be confined to the following :-(i) Creclits(u) US Dollars procured or assigned for the purpose of purchasing SLDBs;(b) Sale proceeds received from investors specified in paragraph 3 above on the sale of SLDBs tothem;(c) Amounts received as repayment of principal and payment of interest on SLDBs held by theaccount holders.(it) Debits(a) For payments to the Government for the acquisition of SLDBs. Such payments should be madepayable to the aforesaid PDSDA;(b) For making payment to sellers of SLDBs from whom SLDBs are purchased by the accountholder in the secondary market;(c) Any other sums payable to the Superintendent of Public Debt, such as fees payable for sub-division and consolidation of bonds etc. These too should be made payable to the aforesaidPDSDA;(d) For selling foreign exchange in the account in excess of the account holder's requirements topurchase SLDBs, to an Authorise Dealer.6. Authorised Dealers with whom the above accounts are maintained should furnish statements of suchaccounts for each month, indicating details of debits and credits, to the Exchange Control Department(D Branch), on or before the t5th day of the following month.7. Permission is also hereby granted in terms of Section 5 of the Exchange Control Act to DesignatedAgents who are primary dealers to purchase US Dollars from an Authorised Dealer subject to the conditionthat such purchases are limited to the extent necessary to purchase SLDBs from the Government or from aholder of SLDBs. Where any sums procured are not necessary for the purchase of SLDBs, the primary dealershall forthwith sell the foreign exchange to an Authorised Dealer.

Yours faithfully

Sgd./ H. A. G. HettiarachchiCortroller of Exclnnge

( xxxiv )Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2004

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2004

Ref. : 06 / 05 10412004Dept. of Exchange ControlCentral Bank of Sri LankaP.O. Box 883Colombo l.

24 August2004Ope ruting Instructiorts toAutltorised Dealers in Foreign Exchange

Dear Sirs,

RELEASE OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE TO GEM DEALERS

Authorised Dealers are hereby informed that the special facility given to gem dealers who travel toMadagascar for purchasing rough gems would also be extended to gem dealers travelling to Myanmar for thispurpose.

Therefore, Authorised Dealers are hereby permitted to sell foreign exchange upto US$ 15,000 (of whichcurrency notes may be issued only upto a maximum of US$ 5,000 and the balance in the form of Travellers'Cheques or a bank draft) to a registered gem dealer who is proceeding to Myanmar, for meeting his cost ofpurchasing gems and personal expenses in Myanmar, on production of a letter of recommendation from theNational Gem and Jewellery Authority (NGJA) to the Authorised Dealer issuing the foreign exchangerecommending his request for exchange.

When releasing foreign exchange as above, the Authorised Dealer to whom the recommendation of theNGJA is addressed should obtain an undertaking from the gem dealer to the effect that -(a) he would bring into Sri Lanka, gems purchased out of exchange released within 45 days of therelease of exchange, and submit a self prepared invoice in triplicate giving the details of thequantity and value of rough gem stones so brought into Sri Lanka to the Sri Lanka Customs forendorsement at the time of his arrival (one such invoice duly endorsed by the Sri Lanka Customsshould be submitted to the Authorised Dealer from whom foreign exchange was purchased, whileanother should be submitted to the NGJA, within 60 days of release of foreign exchange);(b) he would bring into the country all unutilized foreign exchange purchased by him and surrendersuch foreign exchange to an Authorised Dealer within seven days of his arrival. (Evidence to thiseffect should be presented to the Authorised Dealer from whom foreign exchange was purchased);(c) he would also submit a completed statement of accounts in the format at Annex I to theAuthorised Dealer who issued foreign exchange, within 60 days of release of foreign exchange,giving details of foreign exchange purchased from the Authorised Dealer and utilization of suchforeign exchange for the purposes of acquiring rough gem stones and for personal expenditureseparately, together with the evidence of surrendering unutilized foreign exchange to anAuthorised Dealer.All instances of gem dealers failing to comply with any of the above undertakings and requirementsshould be reported by the Authorised Dealer from whom foreign exchange was purchased, to the ExchangeControl Department of the Central Bank and to the NGJA within a period of three months from the date ofrelease of exchange.

Yours faithfully

Sgd./ H. A. G. Hettiarachchi

Cortt roll e r of Exc lnn g e

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2OO4( xxxv )

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2004

Annex I

Statement of Accounts in respect of Foreign Currencies purchased forthe purpose of travel to Myanmar for Purchase of Gems

PurposeAmount of Forei,en CurrencyPurchasedAmount of Foreign CurrencyExpendedUnutilizedBalance

Purchase of Cems

Personal Expcnses

Total

. Date of Purchase of Foreign Currency :. Authorized Dealer from whom Foreign Currency was purchased :. Date of Departure to Myanmar :. Date of Arrival to Sri Lanka :. Date of Surrendering of Unutilized Foreign Currency :. Authorized Dealer to whom Foreign Currency was sold :(Evidence of Surrendering foreign cuffency is attached).

I certify that all the above information is true and corrcct.

Signature of Cem Dealer

Ref. No. : 06 107 105 12004Dept. of Exchange ControlCentral Bank of Sri LankaP.O. Box 883Colombo l.

25 August 2004Operating lnstructions to Autlrcrised Deulers

Dear Sirs,

FREIGHT FORWARDING AND ISSUE OF HOUSE AIRWAY BILLS /HOUSE BILLS OF LADING / FORWARDERS CARGO RECEIPTS

Further to my Operating Instructions No. ECl4819 t(G) dated 12.07.1991 and EC/04197(G) dated4th March 1997 on the above subject, Authorised Dealers are hereby requested to include the followingfreight forwarders who have been registered with the Central Bank of Sri Lanka since 13.12.2003 to the listof freight forwarders included in the Operating Instructions issued prior to 13.12.2003 for the purpose ofaccepting their House Airway Bills/House Bills of Lading/Forwarders Cargo Receipts for negotiation inrespect of export cargo.

Nome of tlte Freight Forwarder Registratiott No.l. Paramount Logistics (Pvt) Ltd. 06107/0091012I2. Shipping & Cargo Services (Pvt) Ltd. 06/071009101223. BAZ International Shipping and Consolidators (Pvt) Ltd. 06107l0}9lol23

( xxxvi )Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2004

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2004

4. Silvermills Limited5. M A Lanka (Pte) Ltd.6. Stewart Forwarding (Private) Limited7. ITS Express Lanka (Pvt) Ltd.8. Cargoplan International (Pvt) Ltd.9. MSA Shipping (Pvt) Ltd.10. NYK Logistics & Kusuhara Lanka (Pvt) Ltd.I l. BAL Trans Logistics Lanka (Pvt) Ltd.

06107loo9t0r2406t07/009t0r2s06t07t009t0t2606t07t009t0r2706t07/009t0t2806/07t009t0t2906t07t009/013006t07t009/0131

Yours faithfully,

Sgd./ H. A. G. Hettiarachchi

Cont roller of Exc ltange

Operating Instructions No. : 0l12004Ref. No. : 33 105 / 031 I 0004 / 001

To : All Licensecl Comnrercial Banks

International Operations Department

I I October 2004

GUIDEL,INES TO COMMERCIAL BANKS ONFORBIGN EXCHANGE SWAPS (USDILKR)

Commercial banks are hereby informed that offering of foreign exchange (USD/LKR) swaps todomestic corporate clients holding Exporters' Foreign Currency (EFC) Accounts is allowed subject to thefollowing conditions:(a) Foreign exchange (USD/LKR) swaps being permitted only with exporters of merchandise whomaintain their export proceeds in EFC Accounts with a commercial bank operating locally andsuch swaps being done only against funds lying in the EFC accounts;(b) Foreign exchange (USD/LKR) swaps being done by those who qualify to enter into forwardcontracts under the exchange control regulations. At least one leg of a swap arrangement must bebased on a permitted underlying transaction with the amounts involved in that leg of the swapcorresponding to the amounts involved in the underlying transaction;(c) The period of a foreign exchange swap not exceeding 120 days;(d) Both legs of swap transactions being reported to the International Operations Dept. daily in the"Daily Foreign Exchange Position Report" and they being within the exposure limits given to thebanks;(e) Adequate internal control measures applicable to treasur-y operations being put in place to preventoperational risk; andA Banks maintaining adequate capital to meet the Capital Adequacy Ratio by risk weighting rheseexposures at 1007o risk weight.

P Liyanage

Actg. Di rector, I rtemutional Opercttiorts

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2004( xxxvii )

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2OO4

Circular No. : RTGS I 0l12004Ref. No. : 34 | 07 lO29 / 0001 / 001

Payments and Settlements Department

16 January 2004

To : AII Participants of the RTGS Systent

WITH THE LIVE CAS SYSTEM

This is to inform you that the RTGS System will be open on l7th,24th and 3lst January 2OO4 for thelimited purpose of testing the CSS pre-live release with the live CAS System in accordance with theinstructions issued in the letter with reference No. 08/1410251001/009, by the Superintendent, Public DebtDepartment of Central Bank of Sri Lanka in this regard on t6th January 2004.

Participants should note that the RTGS System will be open on these three days only for the purpose ofenabling participants to credit the amounts specified by the Superintendent, Public Debt Department fortesting CSS System and for the Central Bank of Sri Lanka to reverse the amounts so credited at the end of thetesting.

Please note that the RTGS *eystem will not be open on the aforementioned three days for settlement ofany valid transaction other than the test transactions specified by the Superintendent, Public Debt Departmentof Central Bank of Sri Lanka.

K R M SiriwardhaneDirector, Payments and Settlements

Circular No. : RTGS I 02 | 2004Ref. No. : 34 | 07 1029 / 0001 / 001

Payments and Settlements Department

29 March 2004

To : All Participants of the LankaSettle Systent

NAT.WEALTH SECURITIES LIMITED

You are hereby informed that Nat-Wealth Securities Limited of Level 06, Millennium House, 46158,Navam Mawatha, Colombo 2, which has been appointed as a Direct Participant and a Dealer DirectParticipant in terms of the provisions of the Local Treasury Bills Ordinance, No. 8 of 1923 and the RegisteredStock and Securities Ordinance, No. 7 of 1937, has been authorized by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka toparticipate in the LankaSettle System witlr effect from April 06,2004. Its S.W.I.F.T. Bank ldentifier Code(BIC), RTGS Settlement Account number and contact details are given below:

( xxxviii )Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2004

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2004

S.W.I.F.T BICRTGS Settlement Account No.

Contact Details:Chief Executi ve OfficerTelephoneFaxe-mail

NWSLLKLXNWSLLKLXXXXOI000456r

Mr. Dammika Ranarvana0n 4 7030000u 4 716275info@natwealth.com

The Settlement Account of Nat-Wealth Securities Limited i.e., NWSLLKLXXXX0I000456I willappear in the RTGS System with 'suspended' status on April 02, 2004 and with 'not-suspended' status witheffect from April 06,2004. All participants of the LankaSettle System will receive S.W.I.F.T. messages rothat effect.

K R M Siriwardhane

Directo r, Payntents anel Settlements

Circular No. : RTGS | 03 12004Ref. No. z 34 | 07 I 029 / 0001 | 001Payments and Settlements Department

23 April 2004

To : AII Participants of the Lankasettle Systent

RESTRICTION OF BUSINESS HOURS OF LANKASETTLE ON APRIL 30. 2OO4

The Central Bank of Sri Lanka, having considered the restricted business hours of participatinginstitutions of LankaSettle on April 30, 2004 (a declared half-holiday in lieu of May Day falling onSaturday), has decided to restrict business hours of LankaSettle on April 30,2004 from 8.00 a.m. to 3.00 p.m.Accordingly, the events after 12.00 noon of the operating schedule of LankaSettle for April 30,2004 will bechanged as follows:

EventRevised Time

MLNS-Regional Cleari ngOMO-Repo (Auction) settlemenrClosure of net settlement on account of primary auctionMLNS-Settlement Clearing and Rupee Draft ClearingClosure of third party paymentsOMO-Repo (Standing Facility) settlementILF ReversalClosure of businessClosure of System

12.OO noon12.45 p.m.1.00 p.m.l.l5 p.m,2.00 p.m.2.15 p.m.2.30 p.m.3.00 p.m.4.00 p.m.

K R M SiriwardhaneDirector, Poyments and Settlenrcnts

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2004( xxxix )

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2004

Circular No. : RTGS | 04 | 2004Ref. No. : 34 I 07 I 029 / 0001 / 0018 July 2004

To : All Participants of tlrc LnnkrtSettle Svstent

THE LANKASETTLE SYSTEM

You are hereby informed that the Central Bank, having considered the representations made by anumber of participants for advancing the daily shut-down of the LankaSettle system and the views expressedrhereon by the participants at the meeting of the RTGS-SSS Sub-Committee held on June 30, 2004, has

decided to shorten the End-of-Day Processing Session of the Daily Operating Schedule of LankaSettle given

under Clause 1.2 of the Volume 4 of the System Rules of LankaSettle by 30 minutes with effect from July 19,2004.

Accordingly, from July 19, 2004, the End-of-Day Processing Session of the Daily Operating Scheduleof LankaSettle will be from 4.00 p.m. to 5.00 p.m. and the system will be closed at 5.00 p.m.

The Daily Operating Schedule in Clause 1.2 of the Volume 4 of the System Rules should be read as

amended accordingly.

H N Thenuwara K RMSiriwardhane

Superintendent, Public Debt Dept. Director, Paymerfis rtnd Settlentents Dept.

Circular No. : RTGS I 05 | 2004Ref. No. : 34 | 07 | 029 / 0001 | 001

Payments and Settlements Department

28 July 2004

To : All Ptrticipants of the LortkaSettle S)'stent

This is to inform you that the RTGS System will be open on August 01,2004 at the backup site only for

the limited purpose of testing the RTGS-GL interface by the Central Bank.

please note that the RTGS System will not be open on the aforementioned day for settlement of any

transactron.

You are hereby requested:(r) Not to send any forward dated RTGS related SWIFT message after 4.00 p.m. (after the closure of

business) on Friday July 30, 2004; and(tt) To disregard all SWIFT messages which will have the value date of 2004108101 and generated on

August 01,2004 by CBCELKLAXXX or CBCELKLXXXX.

K R M Siriwardhane

Di recto r, Pctyments und Settl entents

(xl )Central Bank ol Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2004

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2004

Circular No. : RTGS | 061 2004Ref. No. : 34 I 07 | 029 / 0001 | 001Payments and Settlements Department

l3 December 2004

To : All Participants of the LankaSettle Systent

The Central Bank of Sri Lanka, having considered the restricted business hours of participatinginstitutions of LankaSettle on December 24,2004 (a declared half-holiday in lieu of Christmas day falling onSaturday) and December 31,2004 (restricted business hours to public by licensed commercial banks) hasdecided to restrict business hours of LankaSettle on December 24 and December 31, 2OO4 from 8.00 a.m. to3.00 p.m. Accordingly, the events after 12.00 noon of the operating schedule of LankaSettle for December 24and December 31, 2004 will be revised as follows:

EventRevised Time

MLNS -Regional Clearin gOMO-Repo (Auction) settlementClosure of net settlement on account of primary auctionMlNS-Settlement Clearing and Rupee Draft Clearing andAjustment ClearingClosure of third party paymentsOMO-Repo (Standing Facility) settlementILF ReversalClosure of businessClosure of System

12.00 noon12.45 p.m.1.00 p.m.

1. l5 p.m.2.00 p.m.2.15 p.m.2.30 p.m.3.00 p.m.4.00 p.m.

C Premaratne

Superintendent, Public Debt Dept.K R M SiriwardhaneDirector, Paynrcnts and Settlenxents Dept.

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2004(xli )

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2004

Ref. : 08 | 241002 / 0005 1004Public Debt DepartmentNo. 30 Janadhipathi MawathaColombo L

6 Januarv 2004

To : Chief Executive Officers of Prinwry Dealers

Dear Sirs

Thisdirectionisissuedintermsof Section l2of the RegulationsdatedFebruary 1,2002 issuedbytheMinister of Finance under the Registered Stock and Securities Ordinance and the Local Treasury BillsOrdinance. In terms of this direction Primary Dealers (PDs) are required to refrain from short selling ofsecurities. No PD should sell any securities without actually holding the relevant securities in its portfolio.Securities obtained as collateral on reverse repo transactions are not considered as PD's own securities and

hence they cannot be sold.

Please acknowledge receipt.

KGDDDheerasinghe

Superintendent of Public Debt

Public Debt DepartmentNo. 30 Janadhipathi MawathaColombo l.

29 January 2004

To : All Conmtercial Banks, Prinnry Deslers antltlrc Employee's Provident Fund

Dear Sirs

Clause 4.2 of Volume 3 of LankaSettle System Rules August 2003 is hereby deleted and substitutedwith the following revised clause 4.2.

This amendment to the System Rules shall be effective from 2nd February,2004.

Yours faithfully,

KGDDDheerasinghe

Superintendent of Public Debt

( xlii )Gentral Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2404

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2O04

4.2 Account Types Available in LankaSecure

The following Account Types are uscd in LankaSecure. The Central Bank may,Types that may bc available to any Participant or category of Participant as wellapplied to each Account Type.

at its discretion, restrict thc Accountas the transaction types that may be

Account TypeCodePurpose

Participant's / Central Bank'sOwn AccountowNHolds securities owned by the Participant / Central Bank.

ILF AccountILFHolds securities, in the case of participants, to be transferrcd to thecentral Bank as collateral for lLF, and, in the case of the central Bank.transferred by the participants to the Central Bank as collateral for ILF.

Pledge AccountPLGHolds securities that have been plcdgcd to the Participant (in the case ofan Approved credit Agency) or an entity for whom the Participanr isactin-e. The name of the Pledgor is recorded in the Owncr tield. Securitiesin these accounts cannot be traded except in accordance with applicableRe,qulations.

Customer Account(Resident)CSLHolds securities owned by aParticipant. The account issecurities transactions. ThisDirect Participants.

"person resident in Sri Lanka" Customer of acreated by specifying a resident Owner inAccount Type is available only to Dealer

Customer Account(Non-Resident)CSFHolds securities owned by a "personaccounI is created by specifying atransactions. This Account Type isParticipants.

resident outside Sri Lanka". Thenon-resident Owner in securitiesavailable only to Dealer Direct

Tradable Repo AccountCRPHolds securities that are transferred under a Reverse Repo Agreement by aParticipant or a Customer to a counterparty that are to be returned at afuture date under the terms of such agreement. Secutities in this Accountare tradable.

Non-Tradable Repo AccountREPHolds securities that are transferred under a Reverse Repo Agreement by aParticipant or a Customer to a counterparty that are to be retumed at afuture date under the terms of such agreement. Securities in this accountcannot be traded.

Tradable Customer ReverseRepurchase AccountCREHolds Securities that are transferred underAgreement by a Participant or a customer to areversed at a future date under the terms of suchthis account are tradable.

a Reverse Repurchasecustomer that are to beagreement. Sccurities in

Non-Tradable CustomerRevere Repurchase AccountCRRHolds Securities that are transferred underAgreement by a Participant or a customer to areversed at a future date under the terms of suchthis account cannot be traded.

a Reverse Repurchasecustomer that are to beAgreement. Securitics in

Statutory Investment AccountSTISecurities that are held by Participant to meet statutory requirementsimposed on the Participant.

Primary Auction PurchaseAccountPAPHolds securities purchased at Primary Auction (Primary Dealer andDesi,enated Non Dealer Bidder use only).

Domestic Operations RepoAccountDOPHolds securities transferred to a Participant by the Central Bank under aRepo A-{reement that are to be returned to the Central Bank at a futuredate. Securities in this Account are not tradable.

Domestic OperationsReverse Repo AccountDRPHolds securities transferred toReverse Repo Agreement tharfiuture date.

the Central Bank by a Participant undcrare lo be returncd to the Participant at

a

a

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report -2OO4r rliii r

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2004

Ref. : 08 I 24 I 002/0005 I 004Public Debt DepartmentNo. 30 Janadhipathi MawathaColombo l.

7 June 2004

To : Chief Executive Officers of Primary Dealers

Dear Sirs

Primary Dealers are hereby required to refrain from having adjusted trading or using away prices for

recording their transactions. They should use current market prices, for recording their transactions.

Adjusted trading is a practice involving the sale of a security at a price above the prevailing market

value and the simultaneous purchase and booking of a same or different security at a price greater than itsmarket value. Such transactions inappropriately defer the recognition of losses on securities sold while

establishing an excessive reported value for acquired securities.

This direction is issued in terms of Section l2 of the Regulations dated February 1,2002 issued by theMinister of Finance under the Registered Stock and Securities Ordinance and the Local Treasury Bills

Ordinance.

Please acknowledge the receipt of this direction.

Dr. H N Thenuwara

Superintendent of Public Debt

( rlir, )Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2AO4