( 183)

PERSONNEL

With effect from August 31,1967, Mr. W Tennekoon, Senior Deputy Governor, was appointed Governor of the Central Bank.

The Governor, who is the alternate Governor for Ceylon on the International Monetary Fund, joined the Minister of Finance the Hon'ble U . B. Wanninayake, Governor for Ceylon on the International Monetary Fund at the Meeting of the International Monetary Fund and International Bank for Reconstruction arid Deve­lopment in Rio de Janeiro. He left Ceylon on September 24, 1967 and returned on October 7, 1967.

During the above period of absence of the Governor, the Deputy Governor, Mr. S. E. P. Jansz, functioned as Chief Executive Officer of the Bank by virtue of Section 24 of the Monetary Law Act.

M r M . Rajendra, Permanent Secretary to the Ministry of Nationalized Ser­vices and Sports, who acted for the Permanent Secretary to the Ministry o f Finance during the period M r H.J. Samarakkody was awayfrom Ceylon from September 19 to October 17, 1967, to attend the World Bank and Fund Meetings, functioned as Official Member of the Board for that period.

Dr. Gamani Corea continued to be on service with the Government as Perma­nent Secretary to the Ministry of Planning and Economic Affairs.

M r A . H. Abeynaike, Assistant to the Governor, retired from Central Bank service with effect from, March 1, 1967.

M r S. E. P. Jansz, Assistant to the Governor, was appointed Deputy Governor with effect from September 5, 1967.

M r S. D . Amerasinghe, Chief Accountant, was appointed an Assistant to the Governor with effect from June 6, 1967.

M r P. V . M . Fernando, Director of Bank Supervision and Acting Controller o f Exchange, was appointed an Assistant to the Governor with effect from June 6,1967.

M r A . C. P. Gunesekera, Internal Auditor, was appointed Secretary, Central Bank with effect from June 6, 1967.

M r L . W A . Weerasekera, Establishments Officer, was appointed Acting Director of Establishments with effect from June 6, 1967, the Establishment Division of the Secretariat Department being constituted as a separate Department of the Bank.

M r J. G. P. Jayasundera, Deputy Controller of Exchange, was appointed Acting Controller of Exchange with effect from June 6, 1967.

M r C. H . Fernando, Currency Officer, was appointed Acting Internal Auditor with effect from June 6, 1967.

M r K. Gunaratnam, Deputy Chief Accountant, was appointed Acting Chief Accountant, with effect from June 6, 1967.

M r U . W. B. Aluvihare, Deputy Director of Bank Supervision, was appointed Acting Director of Bank Supervision with effect from June 6 , 1S67.

( 184)

M r P. H. Siriwardena, who was on service with the United Nations as Inter Regional Adviser on Planning, resumed duties in the Central Bank on September 10, 1967.

Dr. W . Rasaputram, who was on a United Nations assignment as Economic Statistician (National Accounts) in Iraq resumed duties in the Central Bank on June 1, 1967.

M r S. Kanesathasan, who was on service with the Internatonal Monetary Fund, resigned from Central Bank service with effect from August 31, 1967.

Mr M . Swaminathan was released from service for a period of two years to take up an appointment as Economist in the Bureau of Statistics of the International Monetary Fund.

Dr M . R . P. Salgado continued to be on service with the International Mone­tary Fund.

M r C. A . B. N. Jayarajah, Senior Economist, participated as the Central Bank nominee in the ECAFE Seminar which was held in Bangkok from August 21—28, 1967. He also attended the Ministerial Meeting of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, Algiers, from October 10—31, 1967.

In the course o f the year under review the following officers of the Central Bank were loaned to the Government or continued to be in service with the Government.

M r M . P. Perera continued as a Director of the Insurance Corporation and Economic Adviser to the Ministry o f Commerce and Trade.

Messrs. M . M . Seneviratne, D . R . Siriwardana, Dr N. Ramachandran, Dr G. Uswatte Aratchchi and M r N. M . Kappagoda continued to be on service with the Ministry of Planning & Economic Affairs.

M r P. B. Karandawala continued to be on service with the Ministry of Finance

M r U . W . B. Aluvihare and Dr S. T. G. Fernando were released on part time basis to serve on Committees on Investment Trusts and Tea Commission res­pectively.

As in the past, a number of officers of the Central Bank continued to be on service with the Government in various committees appointed by the Government.