( 149 )

PERSONNEL

The Governor, Mr. D. W . Rajapatirana, left Ceylon for London on May 11 1965, on official business and returned to Ceylon on May 18, 1965.

The Governor, as Alternate Governor for Ceylon on the International Monetary Fund, left Ceylon on September 13,1965 to attend the Annual Meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Reconstru­ction and Development, the International Finance Corporation and the Interna­tional Development Association, in Washington. He also accompanied the Hon, Minister of Finance to the Finance Ministers' Conference in Kingston, Jamaica. He returned to Ceylon on October 11, 1965.

Mr. M. Rajendra, Permanent Secretary to the Ministry of Nationalised Services, was appointed as acting Official Member during the period Mr. H. J. Samarakkody was away to attend the Commonwealth Finance Ministers' Conference and the World Bank and Fund Meetings.

Mr. J. Tyagaraja, was re-appointed as Appointed Member with effect from July 1, 1965.

Mr. W . Tennekoon, Senior Deputy Governor, left Ceylon on October 20, 1965, as leader of the delegation to the Officials' Preparatory Committee Meeting at Bangkok on the establishment of the Asian Development Bank and returned to Ceylon on November 4, 1965. On November 26, 1965, he left Ceylon as leader of the delegation to the Ministerial Conference and Conference of Plenipotentiaries at Manila on the proposed Asian Development Bank and returned to Ceylon on December 7, 1965.

Mr. D. C. Gunesekera, Deputy Governor, left Ceylon on June 20, 1965, for Bangkok as Ceylon's representative for the Consultative Committee of high level experts of the proposed Asian Development Bank and returned to Ceylon on August 14, 1965. He again left Ceylon on October 17, 1965, to participate in the meeting of the Consultative Committee as well as the Officials' Preparatory Committee Meeting of the Asian Development Bank in Bangkok and returned to Ceylon on November 4, 1965.

On November 24, 1965, he left Ceylon to participate in the Meetings of the Consultative Committee as well as to be Alternate Delegate to the Conference at Ministerial level held in Manila in connection with the proposed Asian Development Bank and returned to Ceylon on December 7, 1965.

Dr. Gamani Corea, Assistant to the Governor and Director of Economic Research was released for service with the Government as Permanent Secretary to the Ministry of Planning and Economic Affairs with effect from July 17, 1965.

Mr. P. H. Siriwardena who was released for service with the Government as Director of National Planning terminated his appointment with the National Planning Department with effect from August 31, 1965. Since then he has been released from service for a peiod of one year in the first instance to take up an United Nations assignment as Inter Regional Adviser in Planning.

( 150 )

Dr. W . M. Tilakaratna, who was at the request of Government on service with the Ceylon Transport Board as General Manager, returned to the Bank on August 1, 1965. He was appointed Acting Director of Economic Research with effect from August 1, 1965. -

Dr. M. R. P. Salgado, participated as a member of the Directing Staff of the Sixth SEANZA Course held in New Zealand in September 1965.

Mr. D. R. Siriwardene participated as Adviser to the Ceylon delegation at the 20th Session "of the United Nations General Assembly.

During the year under review the following officers of the Central Bank were loaned to the Government or continued to be on service with the Government.

Messrs M. M. Seneviratne, D. R. Siriwardene, Dr. N. Ramachandran and Mr. N. M. Kappagoda, were released for service with the Ministry of Planning and Economic Affairs for a period of one year in the first instance with effect from October 1, 1965. '

Mr. S. Kanesathasan was released for service for a period of two years with the International Monetary Fund.

Dr. W . Rasaputram was released from service to take up an assignment. as Economic Statistician (National Accounts) in Iraq for one year.

Mr. M . P. Perera was appointed as a member of the Board of Directors of the Co-operative Wholesale Establishment.

Mrs. O. E. B. Gunawardena was appointed to be the Secretary to the Commission of Inquiry which was to examine a Scheme of profit-sharing between employer and employee in the private sector and in State Corporations.

. Mr. P. B. Karandawala continued to be on service with the Ministry of Finance.

Dr. D. M. Ksnnangara continued to be on service with the Ministry of Internal and External Trade and Supply. He also served as a Director of the Insurance Corporation of Ceylon.

Mr. P. C. Dias continued to be on service with the Government of Somalia as Economist/Statistician in the Somali National Bank. •-

As in the past a number of officers of the Central Bank continued to be of service to the Government in various committees appointed by the Government.