( 31 )

A P P E N D I X I .

A . MAJOB LEGAL ENACTMENTS ADOPTED BY GOVEENMENT IN 1956.

B . MAJOR ADMINISTRATIVE MEASURES ADOPTED BY THE MONETARY BOARD

m 1956.

( 33 )

A—MAJOR LEGAL ENACTMENTS ADOPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT IN 1956

NATIONAL PLANNING COUNCIL ACT, No. 40 OF 1956

An Act to provide for the establishment of a National Planning Council and a Planning. Secretariat and for matters connected therewith.

(Date of Assent: September 14, 1956)

Be it enacted by the Queen's Most Excellent Majesty, b y and with the advice and consent of the Senate and the House of Representatives of Ceylon in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows :—

1. Short title.—This Act may be cited as the National Planning Council Act, No. 40 of 1956.

2. Constitution of the National Planning Council.—(1) There shall be established a council which shall be called the National Planning Council (hereinafter referred to as " the Council " ) and which shall consist of—

(a) the Prime Minister,

(6) the Minister of Finance, and

(c) not more than fifteen other persons appointed as members of the Council by the Prime Minister.

(2) A member of the Council who is appointed by the Prime Minister shall, unless he earlier resigns or his appointment is terminated under sub-section (3), hold office as such member for three years commencing on the date of his appointment.

(3) The appointment of any person as a member of the Council may at any time be terminated by the Prime Minister.

3. Chairman and Deputy Chairman of the Council.—The Prime Minister shall be the Chairman, and the Minister of Finance shall be the Deputy Chairman, of the Council.

4. Delegation of powers and functions of the Chairman of the Council.—The Chairman o f the Council may delegate any of his powers and functions to the Deputy Chairman of the Council.

5. Functions of the Council.—The Council shall advise the Cabinet on the planning of agriculture, industry, commerce, education, housing, health and social services, public utilities, and all other matters pertaining to the national economy.

6. Cabinet's powers in respect of the Council.—The Council shall be subject to the general direction and control of the Cabinet.

7. Rules.—The Council may make rules relating to the meetings of the Council, the procedure for the transaction of business, and any other matter connected with the affairs of the Council.

8. Constitution of the Planning Secretariat.—(1) There shall be established a Planning Secretariat which shall be a Government department consisting of such staff as may be necessary for performing the functions specified in section 9.

(2) There shall be appointed a fit and proper person to be the head of the Planning Secretariat, and he shall be designated and shall serve as Secretary of the National Planning Council.

9. Functions of the Planning Secretariat.—-The Planning Secretariat shall obtain for the Council such information, provide such advisory services, and render in other ways such assistance, as the Council may require for the performance of its functions.

10. Chairman's powers in respect of the Planning Secretariat.—The Planning Secretarial shall be subject to the general direction and control of the Chairman of the Council.

11. Appointment of consultative bodies and engagement of experts.-—The Council may appoint consultative bodies, or engage experts, to inquire into and report on such aspects of planning the economy of Ceylon as may be specified by the Council.

12. Power to obtain information.—(1) The Chairman of the Council or any officer of the Planning Secretariat authorised for the purpose by the Chairman may—

(a) require any person to furnish to him such information as he may consider it necessary to obtain for the purposes of the proper discharge of the functions of the Council, or

(6) require any person to produce for inspection any books or records in his possession containing or likely to contain any such information.

( 34 )

(?) Any person who without reasonable cause <fails or refuses to comply with any require­ment made under sub-section (1) shall be guilty of an offence and shall, on conviction after summary trial before a Magistrate, be liable to a fine not exceeding five hundred rupees or to imprisonment of either description for a term not- exceeding one month, or to both such fine and such imprisonment.

(3) Where any information which is prohibited by any written law from beirig disclosed is disclosed in compliance with a requirement made under sub-section (1), such disclosure shall not be deemed to be a contravention of such written law.

13. Bestriction of disclosure of information obtained under section 12.—(1) No information supplied by any person in compliance with any requirement made under sub-section (1) of section 12 shall be published without the consent in writing of the owner for the time being.of the land, business or undertaking to which such information relates, nor shall such information be communicated to any person except in the discharge of the functions of the Council or the Planning Secretariat. .

(2) Any person who.—

(a) contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1), or

(6) being in possession of any information which to his knowledge is disclosed in con­travention of the provisions of sub-section (1), publishes or communicates that information to any other person, shall be guilty of an offence and shall, on conviction after summary trial before a Magistrate, be liable to the same punishment as is prescribed by section 12 for an offence under that section.

•;• ' • 14. Liability of directors and officers of a corporation which commits an offence under this Act.—Where the person convicted of an offence under this Act is a body corporate, every person who at the time of the commission of such offence was a director or an officer of the body corporate shall be deemed to be guilty of such offence unless he proves that such offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to avoid the commission of such offence. •

15. Regulations.—(1) The Chairman of the-Council may, in consultation with the Council, make regulations in respect of the following matters :—

(a) the remuneration to be paid to any of the members of the Council who axe appointed by the Prime Minister; ,

(6) the engagement of persons otherwise than as public officers to perform any work for the Council or the Planning Secretariat;

(c) any matter connected with the exercise or discharge of the powers and functions of the Council or the Planning Secretariat.

(2) All regulations made under sub-section (1) shall be published in the Oazelte and shall come into operation on a date specified in the regulations or, if no date is so specified, upon such publication, and shall, as soon as practicable after their publication in the Gazette, be brought before the Senate and the House of Representatives for approval. Where any regulation is not approved either by the Senate or by the House of Representatives, it shall be deemed, t,o. be rescinded and the rescission shall take effect on the date on which the regulation is not approved.

(3) The validity of anything done under a regulation shall not be affected by the subsequent rescission of the regulation under sub-section (2).

(4) Notification of the date on which the rescission of a regulation under sub-section (2) takes effect shall be published in the Gazette.

CEYLON SAVINGS B A N K (AMENDMENT) ACT, No. 44 OF 1966

An Act to amend the Ceylon Savings Bank Ordinance ", . •,

(Date of Assent: October 10, 1956)

Be it enacted by the Queen's Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the 'Senate and the House of Representatives of Ceylon in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows :—

1,. Short title.—This Act may be cited as the Ceylon Savings Bank (Amendment) Act No. 44 of 1956.

2. Amendment of section 3A of Chapter 278.—Section 3A of the Ceylon Savings Bank Ordinance (hereinafter referred to as the " principal enactment " ) , as amended by Act No. 6 of 1955, is hereby amended by the substitution, for the words " board of directors," of the words " board'of directors of the Ceylon Savings Bank."

( 35 )

3. Insertion of new section 3B in the principal enactment.—The following new section is hereby inserted immediately after section 3A, and shall have effect as section 3B, of the principal enact­ment :—

3B. " The seal of the board of directors of the Ceylon Savings Bank.—The seal of the board of directors of the Ceylon Savings Bank shall be kept by the manager, and shall not be affixed to any instrument whatsoever except in the presence of the manager, or in his absence the officer appointed to act for him, and one director, who shall sign their names on the instrument in token of their presence."

4. Amendment of section 6 of the principal enactment.—Section 6 of the principal enact­ment, as amended by Act No. 6 of 1955, is hereby amended, in sub-section (2) of that section,, by the substitution, for the word " secretary," of the word " manager."

5. Amendment of section 7 of the principal enactment.—Section 7 of the principal enactment is hereby amended by the substitution, for the word " allowances," of the words " allowances, and the grant of loans and advances."

6. Amendment of section 22 of the principal enactment.—Section 22 of the principal enact­ment, as amended by Act, No. 6 of 1955, is hereby amended as follows :—

(1) in sub-section (1) of that section by the substitution, for the word " secretary,"

wherever that word occurs in that sub-section, of the word " manager " ; (2) in sub-section (5) of that section, by the substitution, for the words " under this

sub-section," of the words " under this section " ; and (3) in sub-section (6) of that section, by the substitution, for the word " invested," o f

the word " deposited."

7. Amendment of section 23 of the principal enactment.—Section 23 of the principal enact­ment is hereby amended, in the marginal note to that section, by the omission of the words " need not specify the name of treasurer."

8. Amendment of section 24 of the principal enactment.—Section 24 of the principal enact­ment, as amended by Act No. 6 of 1955, is hereby amended as follows :—

(a) in sub-section (1) of that section—

(i) by the substitution, for the words "mortgage of land", of the words " mort­gage of immovable property ", and

(ii) by the substitution, for the words "land mortgaged " , of the words " property mortgaged " ;

(6) in sub-section (2) of that section by the substitution, for the words " in the land mortgaged", of the words " t o or in the property mortgaged " ;

(c) in sub-section (4) of that section by the substitution, for the word "land " , wherever

that word occurs in that sub-section, of the word " property " ; (d) in sub-section (5) of that section by the substitution, in paragraph (c) of that sub­

section, for the words " in any land mortgaged ", of the words " to or in any pro­perty mortgaged " ;

(e) in sub-section (6) of that section-—-

(i) by the substitution, for the words "the land", of the words "the mortgaged

property", and (ii) by the substitution, for the words "that land ", of the words " that property"

(/) in sub-section (7) of that section—

(i) by the substitution, in paragraph (a) of that sub-section, for the words " land mortgaged", of the words " property mortgaged", and

(ii) by the substitution, in paragraph (6) of that sub-section, for the words " the land ", of the words " the mortgaged property " ;

(g) in sub-section (8) of that section, by the substitution, for the words "the land"

of the words " the mortgaged property " ; and (h) in the marginal note to that section, by the substitution, for the words " mortgage

of land " , of the words " mortgage of immovable property".

9. Amendment of section 25 of the principal enactment.—Section 25 of the principal enact­ment, as amended by Act No. 6 of 1955, is hereby amended by the substitution, for the word " land", wherever that word occurs in that section, of the word " property".

10. Amendment of section 27 of the principal enactment.—-Section 27 of the principal enact­ment, as amended by Act No. 6 of 1955, is hereby amended by the substitution, for the words " the secretary " , wherever those words occur in that section, of the words " the manager " .

( 3 6 )

11. Mortgages granted to treasurer of the Ceylon Savings Bank before date of commencement of Act No. 6 of 1955.—Every mortgage granted to the treasurer of the Ceylon Savings Bank before the date of commencement of the Ceylon Savings Bank (Amendment) Act, No. 6 of 1955, as security for any loan granted out of the moneys deposited in that bank shall be deemed to have been granted to the board of directors of that bank, and accordingly the bond by which such mortgage has been effected may be discharged by such board and section 24 of the principal enactment shall apply to the property mortgaged by such bond.

12. Retrospective provision.—The amendments effected by sections 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 of this Act shall be deemed to have been made in the principal enactment on February 18, 1955, being the date of commencement of the Ceylon Savings Bank (Amendment) Act, No. 6 of 1955.

CEYLON STATE MORTGAGE B A N K (AMENDMENT) Act, No. 31 of 1956

An Act to amend the Ceylon State Mortgage Bank Ordinance.

Date of Assent: June 14, 1956

Be it enacted by the Queen's Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate and the House of Representatives of Ceylon in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authorities of the same, as follows :—

1. Short title.—This Act may be cited as the Ceylon State Mortgage Bank (Amendment) Act, No. 31 of 1956.

2. Amendment of section 53 of Chapter 277.—Section 53, as amended by Ordinance No. 24 of 1938, of the Ceylon State Mortgage Bank Ordinance (hereinafter referred to as the " principal enactment") is hereby further amended, in paragraph (<J) of sub-section (1) of that section, by the substitution, for the expression " one-half", of the expression " three-fourths".

3. Amendment of section 54 of the principal enactment.—Section 54 of the Principal enactment is hereby amended by the substitution, for paragraph (6) of that section, of the following para­graph :—

" (6) that the borrower has valid title to the property offered as security " .

CEYLON STATE MORTGAGE B A N K (AMENDMENT) ACT, No. 49 of 1956

An Act to amend the Ceylon State Mortgage Bank Ordinance.

Date of Assent: November 7, 1956.

Be it enacted by the Queen's Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate and the House of Representatives of Ceylon in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows :—

1. Short tide.—This Act may be cited as the Ceylon State Mortgage Bank (Amendment) Act, No. 49 of 1956.

2. Amendment of section 35 of Chapter 277.—Section 35 of the Ceylon State Mortgage Bank Ordinance is hereby amended in paragraph (a) of that section, by the substitution, for the words " nor shall such total indebtedness exceed twenty-five million rupees " , of the words "nor shall such total indebtedness exceed such amount as may, from time to time, be fixed by the Minister of Finance in his discretion ".

CEYLON DEVELOPMENT LOANS (AMENDMENT) ACT, No. 8 OF 1956

An Act to amend the Ceylon Development Loans Act, No. 6 of 1954

(Date of Assent: February 3, 1966)

Be it enacted by the Queen's Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate and the House of Representatives of Ceylon in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows :—

1. Short title.—This Act may be cited as the Ceylon Development Loans (Amendment) Act, No. 8 of 1956.

2. Amendment of section 2 of Act No. 6 of 1954.—Section 2 of the Ceylon Development Loans Act, No. 6 of 1954, (hereinafter referred to as the " principal Act " ) , is hereby amended, in sub-section (1) of that section, by the substitution, for the word " work," of the words " work commenced before or on or after the date of commencement of this Act and".

( 37 )

3. Amendment of section 4 of the principal Act.—Section 4 of the principal Act is hereby amended as follows :—

(1) by the re-numbering of that section as sub-section (1) of section 4 ; and

(2) by the addition, at the end of that sub-section, of the following sub-section :—

" (2) Where any sum of money has, before or on or after the date of commence­ment of t h i 3 Act, been expended out of the Consolidated Fund of Ceylon on any such work as is mentioned in sub-section (1) of section 2, that sum may, subject to the proviso to sub-section (1) of this section and upon a resolution in that behalf being passed by the House of Representatives, be replaced out of the moneys raised by way of loan under sub-section (1) of section 2, and upon such replacement such expenditure shall be charged to such loan ".

STAMP (AMENDMENT) ACT, No. 15 OF 1956

An Act to amend the Stamp Ordinance.

(Date of Assent: February 14, 1956)

Be it enacted by the Queen's Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate and the House of Representatives of Ceylon in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows :—

1. Short title.—This Act may be cited as the Stamp (Amendment) Act, No. 15 of 1956.

2. Amendment of section 51 of the principal enactment.—Section 51 of the principal enact­ment is hereby amended as follows :—

by the insertion, immediately, after sub-section (2) of that section, of the following new sub-section:—

" (2a) The provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any other provisions of this Ordinance specifying the person who shall, or the persons who shall and the shares in which they shall, pay stamp duty in respect of any instrument chargeable with such duty " .

3. Amendment of item 23 in Part I of Schedule A to the principal enactment.—Part I of Schedule A to the principal enactment is hereby amended, in item 23, by the insertion, immediately after paragraph (7a) of that item, of the following new paragraph :—

" (76) An instrument creating a mortgage of a policy of life insurance in favour of, and assigning that policy by way of mortgage to, an approved credit agency under section 81 of the Mortgage Act, No. 6 of 1949—1 -0 ".

THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION AGREEMENT ACT,

No. 4 OF 1956

This Act enables Ceylon to become a member of the International Finance Corporation. Ceylon has paid $166,000 to the capital stock of the Corporation, as subscription to 166 shares. The purpose of the Corporation is to further economic development by encouraging the growth of productive private enterprise in member countries, particularly in less developed areas, thus supplementing the activities of the I.B.R.D. Towards this end the Corporation will in asso­ciation with private investors, contribute to the development of its member countries by making investments, without guarantee of repayment by the member government concerned, in cases where sufficient private capital is not available on reasonable terms. The Corporation will also seek to bring together investment opportunities, domestic and foreign private capital, and experienced management, and further stimulate the flow of private capital, domestic and foreign into productive investment in member countries. The existence of a government or. other public interest in such an enterprise shall not necessarily preclude the Corporation from making an investment therein. The Corporation and its officers are prohibited from interfering in the political affairs of any member country; nor can their decisions be influenced by the political character of the member country concerned, as only economic considerations shall be relevant to the decisions of the Corporation. The Corporation is an entity separate and distinct from the I.B.R.D. and the funds of the Corporation are to be kept separate and apart from those of the I.B.R.D. The Corporation is prohibited from lending or borrowing from the I.B.R.D. nor shall one be liable for the acts and obligations of the other. The Corporation acting through the I.B.R.D. is empowered to enter into formal arrangements with the United Nations or other public international organisations having specialised responsibilities in related fields. In order to enable the Corporation to fulfil the functions with which it is entrusted, the Corporation is vested with full judicial personality. Certain immunities and privileges are also granted to the Corporation such as immunity from seizure of its property and assets, inviolability of the Archives of the Corporation, privileges for its official communications and immunities from taxation.

(.. 38 )

B.—MAJOR ADMINISTRATIVE MEASURES ADOPTED BY THE MONETARY BOARD

IN 1956

CENTRAL BANK'S EXCHANGE RATES FOR U.S. DOLLARS

Date Circular Buying Selling No. (per $100) (per§100)

•:• 9.1.56 1/71 Spot Rs. 474 -75 Rs. 475 -00 Forward up to three Rs. 474 -75 Cts. 50 per month premium months against spot 14.2.56 1/72 Spot Rs. 475 -25 Rs. 475 -50 1/72

Forward up to three Rs. 475 -25 Cts. 50 per month premium months against spot 8.3.56 1/73 Spot Rs. 476 -00 Rs. 476 -25 Forward up to three Rs. 476 -00 Cts. 50 per month premium months against spot 19.3.56 1/74 Spot Rs. 475 -50 Rs. 475 -75 Forward up to three Rs. 475 -50 Cts. 50 per month premium months against spot 23.4.56 1/75 Spot Rs. 474 -75 Rs. 475 -00 Forward up to three Rs. 474 -75 Cts. 50 per month premium months against spot , 2.5.56 1/76 Spot Rs. 475 -25 Rs. 475 -50 Forward up to three Rs. 475 -25 Cts. 50 per month premium months against spot 25.6.56 1/77 Spot Rs. 475 -75 Rs. 476 00 Forward up to three Rs. 475 -75 Cts. 50 per month premium months against spot 2.7.56 1/78 Spot Rs. 476 -50 Rs. 476 -75 Forward up to three Rs. 476 -50 Cts. 50 per month premium

13.7.56

months against spot 13.7.56 1/79 Spot Rs. 477 -25 Rs. 477 -50 Forward up to three Rs. 477-25 Cts. 50 per month premium

30.7.56

months against spot 30.7.56 1/80 ;. Spot Rs. 478 -25 Rs. 478 -50 Forward up to three Rs. 478 -25 Cts. 50 per month premium months against spot