( .248)

PERS;ONNEL

Mr. W. Tennekoon relinquished his duties as Governor of the Central Bank of Ceylon with effect from June 1,1971 to take up an appointment as an Ex~ cutive Director of the Asian Development Bank.

Mr. H. E. Tennekoon, Acting Chairman of the Public Service Commission, was appointed to the office of Governor of the Central Bank with effect from June I, 1971. .

The Governor, who is the Alternate Governor for Ceylon of the Inter-national Monetary Fund, joined the Minister of Finance, . the Honourable Dr. N. M. Perera, M. P., Governor for Ceylon of the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, at the Annual Meeting of the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, in Washington. He left Ceylon on Septem-ber 14, 1971 and returned on November 22, 1971.

During the periods Mr. W. Tennekoon was on leave, from February 5, 1971 to March 19, 1971 and from May 25, 1971 to May 31,1971 and during the period the Governor, Mr. H. E. Tennekoon was abroad attending the International Monetary Fund and International Bank for Reconstruction and Development Meetings, the Deputy Governor, Dr. W. M. Tilakaratna was designated Senior

Deputy Governor and functioned as Chief Executive Officer of the Bank in terms of Section 24 of the Monetary Law Act.

Mr. J. Tyagaraja, Appointed Member of the Monetary Board ceased to be a member of the Monetary Board with effect from July 1, 1971.

Mr. M. Rajendra, who retired from the post of Permanent Secretary to the Ministry of Finance with effect from May 7, 1971, was nominated as the Appointed Member of the Monetary Board With effect from July 16, 1971.

Mr. C. A. Coorey, who was the Deputy Secretary to the Treasury, .was appointed Acting Permanent Secretary to the Ministry of Finance llnd Official Member of the Monetary Board with effect from May 7, 1971.

Mr. L. Abeyratne, Acting Permanent Secretary to the Ministry of Finance and Acting Secretary to the Treasury, who acted for Mr. C. A. Coorey, Acting' Permanent Secretary to ~he Ministry of Finance, during the period he was away from Ceylon to attend the Internatlorial Monetary Fund . and International Bank for ReconstruCtion. arid Development Meetings, functioned as Official Member of the MonetafV Board for that period.

Mr. S. E. P. Jarisz,Senior Deputy Governor, retired from Bank service with . effect from April i, 1971. .

Dr. Gamani Corea, Deputy Governor, was granted leave from May2S, 1971 for about 18 months to aCcept fellowship facilities eXtended to him by the Uni-versity of Oxford and the Institute of Development Studies at Sussex.

. f·2A9 )

.Dr. W. M. Tilakar~trla, Assistan~ te the Gev~m9"" waS appointed Deputy Gevernor with effect frem January I, 1971.

Mr, P. V. M. Fernando, Assistantto the Governer; was ,appointed Senier Assistant te the Governor with effect" from January I, 1971.

Mr. i-I; L. D. Selvaratnam, Iriter~al Auditor,was appointed Assistant te the Gevernor with effect frem March 17; 1971. .

Mr. A. C: P.Gunasekera, Secretary, was appoint~d Assistant te the Gever~ nor with effect frem March 17, 1971.

Mr. L. W. A. Weerasek~ra, Superintendent .of Public Debt, was appeinted . Secretary with effect from March 17. 1971 ..

Mr. K. Gunaratnam, Chief Accountant, was released fer a peried .of three months with effect from November 22, 1971 to. the ECAFE, Bangkek, .te take

UP an appointme~1.t as a shert~termcQnsultant .. Mr. A. aandar.a~ayake, Deputy Chief Acceuntant, was appointed ~e act as Chief Acceuntant. in the absence .of

Mr. Gunaratnam with effect from November 22, 1971.

Dr~ W. Rasaputram, Directer of Econe~ic Re$earch, whe w~s en. service with the Manpewer Planning and Organisatiens Branch of the International Labour Organisatien, Regienal Office in Bangkek, reverted te Bank service with

eff~ct from Octeber 25, 1971.

M:r. U W. B. Aluvihare, Adviser, Banking Develepment. reSigned from Bank service with effect frem March 1,1971..

Mr. M. P. Perera, Deputy Centreller .of Exchange, was appeinted Acting Internal Auditor with effect from March 17, 1971.

Mr. H. N. S. Karunatilake, Acting Directer .ef Ecenemic ReSearch, was appeinted te act as Additional Directer .of Econemic Research with effect frem October 25, 1971.

Mr. D. R. Siriwardene, Special Officer, was appeinted Acting Super~ntendent .of Public Debt with effect frem March 17, 1971.

Mr. S~ Thayanithy, was released te the Internatienal Monetary Fund for a period of 3 years frem February 14, 1971.

Mr. B.B. D. M.Perera centinued to be on service with the United Nations in Saudi Arabia.

( ·.250' )

Dr. G. Uswatte Arachchi was released to the United Nations for a period of two years with effect from July 1, 1971.

Mrs. A. H. de Silva was released from September 20, 1971, to take up an appointment as Economist in the International Monetary Fund's Young Profe-ssionals Programme.

In the course of the year under review the following officers of the Central Bank were under release to Government and to Government Corporations.

Ministry of Finance - Messrs. H. R. de Zoysa, P. C. Munasinghe and H .. M. R. Ellepola.

Ministry of Foreign and Internal Trade - Dr. S. T. G, Fernando.

Ministry of Planning and Employment - Dr. N. Ramachandran, Dr. G' Uswatte Arachchi (upto June 30, 1971), Mr. N. M. Kappagoda, Dr. S. M. P' Suriyaarachchi and Mr. P. M. Hassan.

Ministry of Plantation Industries - Mr. A. S. Jayawardena.

Ministry of Public Administration, Local Government and Home AHairs-Mr. P. H. Siriwardena.

Ministry of Shipping and Tourism - Mr. P. B. Karandawala.

State Gem Corporation - Mr. T. G. Punchiappuhamy.