( 147 )

( F ) C U R R E N T S A M P L E S U R V E Y S

Four surveys were completed and a new survey was undertaken in 1974. The following surveys were completed:-

1. The Techno-Economic Survey of the UdaWalawe project area.

2. An Initial Survey of the State of Growth in the Mahaweli Develop足ment area.

3. The Survey on the Determination of Labour Force Participation Rates in Sri Lanka.

4. The Consumer Finance Survey 1973.

The following new survey was undertaken:

1. Techno-Economic Survey of the U d a W a l a w e Project A r e a

The field work in connection with the Techno-Economic Survey of the Uda Walawe project area which commenced in 1973 was completed in December, 1974. The primary purpose of this survey was to measure the economic potential in re足lation to the available human physical resources and to identify and analyse the problems connected with the farm economy.

During the survey a sample of farmers was visited weekly to collect information on the cost of production of major crops, employment, income and expenditure of farmers, educational and health facilities. The data collected are now being pro足cessed.

2. Initial Survey of the S t a t e of G r o w t h in t h e M a h a w e l i Development A r e a

The Survey of the State of Growth in the Mahaweli Development Area planned and executed In 1974, collected data on demography, education, employment, hous足ing, various service centres, transport facilities, land utilisation, cultivation practices, irrigation, income from regular and chena cultivation, garden crops and village leadership from a sample of 15 villages and 5 colonisation schemes.

Tabulation of survey data had been completed and the report which is being written will be published during the course of 1975.

3. Survey on the Determination of Labour Force Participation Rates in

S r i Lanka

On the invitation of the International Labour Organisation the Director of Economic Research presented a research proposal outlining the scope and coverage of a study of Labour Force Participation Rates in Sri Lanka. This proposal was acccepted by the I.L.O. and subsequently, the Monetary Board of the Central Bank approved the execution of the research project. Thus the sample survey on Labour Force Participation Rates in Sri Lanka was launched on the first of July 1973. The survey was completed by the end of 1973 and the final report published in 1974.

4. Consumer Finance Survey 1973

The Consumer Finance Survey of 1973 was the third of such surveys carried out by the Central Bank. The earlier surveys being those carried out In 1953 and

( 148 )

1963. A brief summary of the findings of the 1973 survey was given in the last Annual Report and the final report of the survey has been published.

5. Survey on Land and Labour Utilization in S r i Lanka

The preliminary work on the survey of Land and Labour Utilization which was carried out by the Department of Economic Research commenced in November 1974. This survey which covered the whole island was spread out over a period of two weeks. The information obtained from this survey formed the basis of the major survey on Land and Labour Utilization in Sri Lanka which was launched on the 15th of January 1975. The field work in connection with this survey began in January 1975 and was completed in March 1975. The data is in the process of tabulation and the final report is expected to be published by the middle of this year.