(171)

PERSONNEL

The Governor, Mr. D. W. Rajapatirana, left Ceylon for Bangkok on January 31, 1966, in order to attend a Central Bank Governors' Meeting in Bang­kok and returned to Ceylon on February 8, 1966.

The Governor, who is the Alternate Governor for Ceylon on the International Monetary Fund, accompanied the Minister of Finance, the Honourable LT. B. Wanninayake, to the Commonwealth Finance Ministers' Conference in Montreal, Canada, and the Annual Meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development in Washington. He left Ceylon on September 10, 1966, and returned on October 16, 1966.

During the above periods of absence of the Governor, the Senior Deputy Governor, Mr. W. Tennekoon, functioned as Chief Executive Officer of the Bank Toy virtue of Section 24 of the Monetary Law Act.

Mr. M. Rajendra, Permanent Secretary to the Minister of Nationalised Ser­vices, who acted for the Permanent Secretary to the Ministry of Finance during the period Mr. H. J. Samarakkody was away from Ceylon to attend the Common­wealth Finance Ministers' Conference and the World Bank and Fund Meetings, functioned as Official Member for that period. •

. Mr. D. C. Gunesekera, Deputy Governor, who was in the first instance released for service in connection with the establishment of the Asian Develop­ment Bank in Manila, subsequently retired from the Central Bank service with effect from November 24, 1966.

Dr. Gamani Corea continued to be on service with the Government as Perma­nent Secretary to the Ministry of Planning and Economic Affairs.

Mr. S. E. P. Jansz was appointed as an Assistant to the Governor with effect from April 1, 1966 in addition to his duties as Controller of Exchange. With effect from December 1, 1966, Mr. Jansz was released from his duties as Controller of Exchange for special duty as Chairman of a Committee appointed by the Minister of Finance to consider a scheme of salaries, emoluments and allowances for the staff of the Central Bank, the People's Bank, and the Bank of Ceylon.

Mr. P. V. M. Fernando, Director of Bank Supervision, was, in addition to his substantive duties, appointed Acting Controller of Exchange with effect from December 1, 1966, with the release of Mr. S. E. P. Jansz for special duty as men­tioned above.

Dr. W . M. Tilakaratna, Acting Director of Economic Research, was appointed Director of Economic Research with effect from April 1, 1966.

( 172)

Mr. P. H. Siriwardena continued to be on service with the United Nations as-Inter Regional Adviser on Planning.

Mr. F. R. S. Weeraratne, who was released from service with effect from May 1, 1966, for work in connection with the Asian Development Bank, resigned from Central Bank service with effect from November 24, 1966.

Mr. S. Kanesathasan continued to be on service with the International Monetary Fund.

Dr. W . Rasaputram continued to be on service for a further year on a United Nations assignment as Economic Statistician (National Accounts) in Iraq.

Mr. P. C. Dias, who was on service with the Government of Somalia on a United Nations assignment as Economist/Statistician in the Somalia National Bank, resigned from the Central Bank service with effect from February 26, 1966.

Dr. M. R. P. Salgado was released for service for a period of one to two years-with effect from May 4, 1966 to take up an appointment with the International Monetary Fund.

In the course of the year under review the following officers of the Central Bank were loaned to the Government or continued to be on service with the Government.

Dr. W. M. Tilakaratna was released on a part-time basis to serve as Economic Adviser to the Taxation Inquiry Commission.

Mr. M. P. Perera was released for appointment as a Director of the Insu­rance Corporation and Economic Adviser to the Ministry of Commerce and Trade in place of Dr. D. M. Kannangara, who resigned from the Bank service with effect from February 1, 1966. Mr. Perera, who earlier served as a member of the Board of Directors of the Co-operative Wholesale Establishment, resigned from mem­bership of that Board with effect from December 13, 1966.

Mrs. G. Gunawardena, who was serving as the Secretary to the Commission of Inquiry to examine a Scheme of Profit-sharing between employer and employees in the private sector and in State Corporations, resumed duties in the Central Bank on November 30, 1966.

Mr. H. R. de Zoysa was released on a part-time basis to serve as the Assistant Economic Adviser to the Taxation Inquiry Commission.

Dr. G. Uswatte Aratchchi was released for service with the Ministry of Planning and Economic Affairs for a period of one year in the first instance.

Messrs. M. M. Seneviratne, D. R. Siriwardene, N. M. Kappagoda and Dr. N. Ramachandran continued to be on service with the Ministry of Planning and Economic Affairs.

Mr. P. B. Karandawala continued to be on service with the Ministry of Finance.

As in the past, a number of officers of the Central Bank continued to be on service with the Government on various committees appointed by the Government.