( 153 )

IV. PERSONNEL

The Governor, Mr. D. W. Rajapatirana, who is the Alternate Governor for Ceylon on the International Monetary Fund, left Ceylon for Kuala Lumpur and Tokyo on August 31, 1964, in order to attend the Commonwealth Finance Ministers' Conference in Kuala Lumpur, the Annual Meetings of the Inter­national Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Finance Corporation and the International Development Association held in Tokyo. On his way back to Ceylon the Governor accompanied the Hon'ble Minister of Finance, Dr. N. M. Perera to Peking, China and returned to Ceylon on Septem­ber 22, 1964.

The Governor attended the Sixth Conference of the Council of SEANZA Governors held in Wellington, New Zealand, in October, 1964. He left for Wellington on October 29, 1964, and returned to Ceylon on November 10, 1964.

Mr, W. Tennekoon, Deputy Governor, who was on duty at the Inter­national Monetary Fund as Alternate Executive Director, completed his period of service in the Fund. He resumed duties in the Central Bank on December 21, 1964, and was designated Senior Deputy Governor.

Mr. D. C. Gunesekera was appointed Deputy Governor.

Dr. Gamani Corea left Ceylon on January 22, 1964, to attend the Fifth SEANZA Central Banking Course held in Karachi as a Visiting Specialist and returned to Ceylon on February 1, 1964. On March 31, 1964, he left Ceylon for Geneva to attend the United Nations Conference on Trade and Develop­ment as a member of the Ceylon Delegation and returned to Ceylon on June 18, 1964. Dr. Corea also accompanied the Governor to Kuala Lumpur and Tokyo on August 31, 1964 for the Commonwealth Finance Ministers' Conference and the Annual Meetings of the International Monetary Fund and International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. He returned to Ceylon on Septem­ber 20, 1964. On October 18, 1964, Dr. Corea left Ceylon to serve as Consul­tant to the Secretary General, United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in New York and returned to the Island on December 2, 1964.

During the year under review the following officers of the Central Bank were loaned to the Government or continued to be on service with the Government.

Mr. P. H. Siriwardena continued to be in the service of the Government as Director of National Planning.

Dr. W. M. Tilakaratne who had already been released for service with the Ceylon Petroleum Corporation was released for service as General Manager of the Ceylon Transport Board with effect from August 25, 1964.

Dr. M. R. P. Salgado who was on service with the Ministry of Agricul­ture, Food and Co-operatives returned for service in the Bank on July 1, 1964.

(154)

Mr. P. B. Karandawala continued to be on service with the Ministry of Finance.

Dr< D. M. Kannangara was released for service with the Ministry of Internal and External Trade and Supply. He was later appointed a Director of the Insurance Corporation.

As in the past a number of officers of the Central Bank continued to be of service to the Government in various committees appointed by the Government.

Bank Building:

The Bank moved into its new premises on Queen Street in the course of 1964. Hitherto it had been distributed over four different places with all the attendant disadvantages and inconvenience to the public. The Bank now has its own underground currency vaults and houses the large departments of Exchange Control and the Employees' Provident Fund together with its other central banking departments in one building.