( 288 )

P E R S O N N E L

The Governor, Mr W. Tennekoon left Ceylon for Kuala Lumpur on February 12, 1968 in order to attend a Conference of South East Asian Central Bank Governors, and returned on February 20, 1968.

Mr. Tennekoon was re-appointed Governor of the Central Bank with effect from July 1, 1968. The Governor, who is the Alternate Governor for Ceylon on the International Monetary Fund, joined the Minister of Finance, the Hon'ble U. B. Wanninayake, M.P., Governor for Ceylon on the International Monetary Fund, at the Annual Meetings of the International Monetary Fund and International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, in Washington He left Ceylon on September 19, 1968, and returned on October 20, 1968.

During the above periods of absence of the Governor, the Deputy Gover­nor, Mr. S. E. P. Jansz, functioned as Chief Executive Officer of the Bank by virtue of Section 24 of the Monetary Law Act.

Mr. M. Rajendra, Permanent Secretary to the Ministry of Nationalised Services, who acted for the Permanent Secretary to the Ministry of Finance during the period Mr H. J. Samarakkody was away from Ceylon to attend the World Bank and Fund Meetings and during the period of leave preparatory to his retirement from November 15, 1968, functioned as Officical Member of the Board for these periods of absence of Mr. Samarakkody.

Dr. Gamani Corea continued to be on service with the Government as Permanent Secretary to the Ministry of Planning and Economic Affairs.

Dr. W. M. Tilakeratna, Director of Economic Research, was appointed an Assistant to the Governor with effect from November 15, 1968.

Mr. O. B. Gunawardana, Superintendent of Public Debt, was appointed Internal Auditor with effect from November 15, 1968.

Mr. J. G. P. Jayasundera, Controller of Exchange, was appointed Director

of Bank Supervision with effect from November 15, 1968.

Mr. C. H. Fernando, Internal Auditor, was appointed Controller of Exchange with effect from November 15, 1968.

Mr. P. H. Siriwardena, Special Officer, was appointed Acting Superin­tendent of Public Debt with effect from November 15, 1968.

Mr. U. W. B. Aluvihare, Director of Bank Supervision, was appointed Adviser, Banking Development with effect from November 15, 1968.

Dr. W. Rasaputram, Senior Deputy Director of Economic Research, was appointed Acting Director of Economic Research with effect from November

15, 1968. He participated in a Consultants Group of the ECAFE held in Bangkok for one month from mid-October 1968.

( 289 )

Dr. W. M. Tilakaratna participated in the Third Ministerial Conference on Asian Economic Co-operation organised by the ECAFE and held in Bangkok from December 11-14, 1968, as a member of a Government delegation appointed by the Hon. Prime Minister.

Mr. M. Swaminathan and Dr. M. R. P. Salgado continued to be on service with the International Monetary Fund.

Mr. M. P. Perera was released from service for one year from March 14 1968 to take up an appointment under the International Monetary Fund as Research Adviser in the Nepal Rashtra Bank.

Mr. C. A. B. N. Jayarajah accompanied the Governor to the 3rd Conference of South East Asian Central Bank Governors held in Kuala Lumpur in February 1968. He was released from service from May 1, 1968, to January 15, 1969, to take up an appointment with the ECAFE in Bangkok, and was a member of the Ceylon Delegation to the UNCTAD II held in New Delhi in March 1968. He was also the Ceylon Delegate in the Meeting of the Technical Committee II of the Central Bank officials convened by Bank Negara, Malayasia, and held from September 5-7, 1968, and in the Meeting of the Technical Committee III of South East Asian Central Banks held in Bangkok from December 4-6, 1968.

In the course of the year under review the following officers of the Central Bank were loaned to the Government or continued to be in service with the Government.

Messrs. M. M. Seneviratne, D. R. Siriwardane, Dr. N. Ramachandran, Dr. G. Uswatte Aratchchi and Mr. N. M. Kappagoda, continued to be on service with the Ministry of Planning and Economic Affairs.

Mr. P. B. Karandawala continued to be on service with the Ministry of Finance,

Mr. H. R. de Zoyza was released for service with the Treasury from April 1, 1968.

As in the past, a number of officers of the Central Bank continued to be on service with the Government in various committees appointed by the Government.