EFFl

---

PART III

MAJOR ADMINISTRATIVE MEASURES ADOPTEDTHE MONETARY BOARD IN 2OO5

Bank Supervision Departmentl. Licensed Specialised Banks - Deposit Direction (Amendment)2. Banking (Amendment) Act - Issue of Directions etc'

2.a Direction under S.46 (l) of the Banking (Amendment) Act

2.b Determinarion under S.47(3), (4), (5) and (6) of the Banking (Amendment) Act

2.c Order published under Section 4l (4) of the Banking Act3. Submission of the Monthly and Quarterly compliance reports 02104100410010/0014. Public disclosure by publication of bank accounts in the press 02/O4l0O310400/0015. Banking Act (single Borrower Limit) Direction No 2 of 20056. Accommodation to Directors and related companies7. Banking Act (Single Borrower Limit) Direction No. 3 of 20058. Appointment of Directors of Banks (Section 42 ofthe Banking Act No.30 of 1988 as amended)

8.a Affidavit ro be submitted in terms of Section 42 (2) of the Banking Act

8.b Declaration to be submitted by person proposed as a Directorg. Enhancement of Minimum Capital Requirement of Banks (LCB) O2lL7l402lO013|OOI

10. Enhancement of Minimum Capital Requirement of Banks (LSB) 021171402/0073rc41

I l. Introduction of products based on Islamic Principles

12. Request to maintain Capital in Foreign Currency

13. Single Borrower Limit Direction No. 4 of 2005 02104/002lOI0IlOOz

14. Annual License Fee of Licensed Specialised Bank 02/081006/00011002

15. Request to maintain Capital of Banks in Foreign Currency O2lO4lOO2/OOl8/001

16. Publication of Quarterly Financial Statements of Banks in the Press 02/041003/0401/001

17. Banking Act (Single Borrower Limit) Direction No. 5 of 2005-LSB

18. Single Borrower Limit

Domestic Operations Department

19. Operating Instructions on Provision of Intra-day LiquidityFacifity (ILF) against Scripless Government Securities on LankaSettle 35/01/00510006109

Exchange Control Department

BY

02t041002100121002

02t04t002/00121002

06t04t0v2005

06t04/0212005

06/04103/2005

Page

(i)

(i)

(i)

(ii)(iii)(iii)

(iv)

(iv)

(vi)

(vii)

(ix)

(ix)

(x)

(xi)

(xii)(xiii)(xiii)

(xiv)

(xvi)

(xvii)(xviii)

(xxx)

(xxxii)

20. Operating Instructions to Authorised Dealers (PTIRA)

21. Indirect Exporters' Foreign Currency Accounts (IEFCA)

22. Operating Instructions to Authorised Dealers andthe National Savings Bank (PTIRA)

(xxxiii)

(xxxiii)

(xxxiv)

(xxxi v)

23. Amendment of Special Import License Regulations24. Operating Instructions to Authorised Dealers on Monitoring Schemeon Foreign Exchange Drawings against International ElectronicCredit/ Debit or any other Fund Transfer Cards.

International Operation Department

25. Directions on Financial Derivative Products (Revised)

Payments and Settlements Department

26. Upgrading the Live CAS/CSS/Web Server Applications/Databases atrhe LankaSettle Primary Site - RTGS/O3 /200527. Appointment of National Development Bank Ltd. as a participant inLankaSettle System - RTGS/O412005

28. Imposing a Default Charge on Failure to Maintain Adequate Fundsin RTGS Settlement Accounts for Settlement of Net Clearing Obligationsof Licensed Commercial Banks - RTGS/O51200529. Change of Name of Muslim Commercial Bank Ltd. - RTGS/O7l2OO5

Public Debt Department

30, Direction on Enhancement of Minimum Capital Requirementsof Primary Dealers

06/05t04t2005

06t08t06t2005

(xxxv)

(xxxv)

08l24l0o2lOO0l1005 (xlvi)

31. Direction on Enhancement of Minimum Capital Requirement, DividendDistribution and Maintenance of Tier II Capital by Primary Dealers 08/241002100051005 (xlvii)32. Amendment to LankaSettle System Rules, August 2003 - SSSS/01/2005 081251001/0034/001 (xlvii)

33/011002100861002 (xxxix)

34/Oi 1029/0001/001 (xliv)

34lol102910001/001 (xliv)

34loi l029l000ll001 (xlv)

34/07 /029/0001/001 (xlvi)

(xlviii)

(l)

(l)(tii)

(rii)

6 of 2005 (liii)(riii)

(liv)

(lv)

(lv)

(lvi)(lvii)(lviii)

(lix)

(lxi)

(lxi)

Supervision of Non-Bank Financial Institutions Department

33. Finance Companies (Deposits) Direction No. I of 2005

34. Finance Companies (Interests) Direction No. 2 of 2005

35. Finance Companies (Liquid Assets) Direction No. 3 of 2005

36. Finance Companies (Closure of Office/s for business) Direction No. 4 of 2OO5

37. Finance Companies (Structural Changes) Direction No. 5 of 2005

38. Finance Companies (Opening/ Shifting/ Closure of Branches/ Offices) Direction No.

39. Finance Companies (Registration and Licensing) Rules No. I of 200540. Direction on Capital Adequacy - Amendments to Instructions41. Guidelines to All Registered Finance Companies Regarding Inclusion ofEligible Revaluation Reserves in Capital Funds42. Finance Companies (Risk Weighted Capital Adequacy Ratio )Direction No. 2 of 2003 - Amendments To Instructions43. Finance Leasing (Minimum Capital) Direction No. I of 200544. Finance Leasing (Provision for Bad and Doubtful Debts) Direction No. 2 of 200545. Finance Leasing (Single Borrower Limit) Direction No. 3 of 200546. Finance Leasing (Gearing Ratio) Direction No. 4 of 200547. Finance Leasing (Accrued Interest) Direction No. 5 of 200548. Finance Leasing (Reserve Fund) Direction No. 6 of 2005

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

BANKING ACT NO. 30 OF 1988

Arnendment to Direction dated'7'h May 1998 issued by the Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka,under Section 761(L) of the Bankin-e Act No. 30 of 1988 as atnended by the Banking Amendment Act No. 33 of1995 in respect of deposits.tr, *ilirVrendisColornbo03 January 2005

Sub section (b) of Section 4 of the above Direction is repealed with immediate effect.

021041002100121002Bank Supervision Department16 Februarv 2005

To: CEOs of Licensed Commercial BanksSecretary GeneraUSLBA

Dear Sirs,BANKING (AMENDMENT) ACT NO. 2 OF 2OO5

As you may be aware, the Banking Amendment BiII has been passed by the Parliament as BankingAmendment Act No. 2 of 2005.

Please find enclosed the following:o The limits approved by the Monetary Board in terms of Section 47(4)o The Determination made by the Monetary Board in terms of Section aiQ)@)(5) and (6)o The Directions issued in terms of Section 46(l)

Please acknowledge receipt.

Yours faithfully,

Sgd. Director of Bank Supervision

BANKING ACT

Directions issued by tlre Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka under Section 46(I) of theBarrking Act No. 30 of 1988 as amended by Banking (Arnendrnent) Act No. 2 of 2005.

", #il|VlendisColornboll February 2005

DIRECTIONS

In the exercise of the powers conferred by Section 46(l) of the Bankin-q Act No. 30 of 1988 as amended by

Bankin_s (Amerrdment) Act No. 2 of 2005, the Monetary Board issues the followin,e Directions:l. All licensed commercial banks are hereby required to conrply with the provisions of the followingdirections issued by the Monetary Board under subsectiou (t) of Section 46 of the Banking Act, whiclr

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005(i)

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

were in force on 9'l' February, 2005 being the day imrnediately precedin-e the date on whiclr the Banking(Amendrnent) Act No. 2 of 2005 catne into force.a) Direction No.2 of 1999 (Sin,ele Borrower Limit) issued under Section 46(t)(c) on llrr'October,1999, as atnended by the Amendrnent to Direction No. 2 of 1999 (Single Borrower Lirnit) issued onl8'h November, 2003.b) Direction No. I of 1998 (Share Capital Ownership) issued on 22"d October, 1998 under Sectiorr46(lXd) of the Bankin_e Act.The above-mentioned directions (a) and (b) shall be read and construed as if they had been issuedunder subsection (l) of Sectiot-t 46 of the Banking Act No. 30 of 1988 as amended by Bankil_q(Arnendrnent) Act No. 2 of 2005.

Determination rnade by the Monetaryand (6) of the Bankin-e Act No. 30 of

ColomboI I February 2005

BANKING ACT

Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka under section 47(3), (4), (5)1988 as arnended by Banking (Arnendment) Act No. 2 of 2005.

Sgd. Sunil MendisGovernor

DETERMINATIONL Tlre Monetary Board, by virtue of the provisions of section 47(3), (4), (5) and (6) of the Banking Act,has approved the followin-e as security to be obtained by a licensed cornrnercial bank in _{rantin_eaccolnmodation to a director or to a close relation of such director or to any concern in which directorhas a substantial interest, as the case may be:(a) Sir Lanka Government Guarantees;(b) Bank Guarantees;(c) Guarantees of International Financial Institutions; such as the World Bank, IMF, IFC, ADB,USAID etc.In the case of accommodation secured by items (a), (b) or (c) above, the accommodation grantedslrould not exceed I00Vo of the -quarantee.(d) Government or Central Bank Securities provided that the accommodation granted would notexceed 90 percent of the face value or market value, whichever is lower of such securities;(e) Cash Deposits in any cornmercial bank held under lien to the order of the lendin-e bank providedthat the accommodation -eranted would not exceed 90 percent of such cash deposits;(f) Life Insurance Policies issued in Sri Lanka and assigned to the lendin-e bank provided that theaccommodatiort ,eranted would not exceed 75 percent of the surrender value of such policy;(,e) hnrnovable property held on a freehold basis and on whiclr a primary mortgage has been taken bythe lendin-e bank provided tlrat the accommodation -eranted would not exceed 60 percent of thevalue of such property.(h) Immovable property held on a leasehold basis provided that -(i) tlre lease has been granted by a statutory body;(ii) the unexpired period of lease is at least 50 years;(iii) there is no prohibition on tlre mort-ea-ee of the leasehold rights coutained in the Deed ofLease, or if the Deed of Lease requires the prior approval of tlre Lessor for the mort-ea,ee ofthe leasehold rights suclr approval has beerr obtained from the Lessor;(iv) a prirnary rnort-sa-qe has been taken on the leasehold rights by the lendin-e bank;

and provided further tlrat the accommodation granted does not exceed 60 percent of the valueof such property.(i) :i:ffi1"::J,:1";.fil1';iln ffi:'.ul;t",.';5'l3;,ffHi'ff *illtl':"jii",;,'^*d 'lha'[ "re0) Mort,qa-ee of Stock-in-Trade provided that the accomrnodation -eranted would not exceed 3O%,ofthe rnarket value of such Stock-in-Trade.

(i )Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

(k) In the case of a concern where a substantial interest is held by a Bankin-e Irrstitution as definedin section 127 of the Monetary Law Act, other than a licensed comtnercial bank, inrmovableproperty held on a freehold basis and on which a secondary mort,ea-ee has been taken by alending bank, provided tlrat tlre total accornrnodation granted on the prirnary mortga-ee and thesecondary mortga-qe does not exceed 60Vo of the value of such property; and(l) Pled-ee of non-perislrable -eoods of a cornrnercial nature wlrich are readily rnarketable, excludin-eall manufactured foods and other iterns with a limited shelf life, provided that theaccommodations -eranted would not exceed 40 percent of the rnarket value of such -goods.2. For the purposes of Section 47(5), in respect of accommodation -eranted by a licensed commercial bankto a concern in which a director of such bank has a substantial interest, wltere the substantial interestheld in the concern by such director -(i) exceeds one rnillion rupees but does not exceed 10 percent of its paid up capital or is theexistence of a -euarantee or indemnity for a surn less than l0 percent of that capital, where theconcern rs a company.(ii) Is the existence of a -euarantee or indemnity for a sum less than l0 percent of the total capitalsubscribed by all its partners, where the concern is a firm.Such security as the licensed commercial bank considers adequate having re-qard to thecreditworthiness of such concern should be obtained. Such accommodation should be reported to theDirector, Bank Supervision, within one week of disbursement of such accommodation.

ORDER PUBLISHED UNDER SECTION 47(4) OF THE BANKING ACT NO. 30OF 1988 AS AMENDED BY BANKING (AMENDMENT) ACT NO. 2 OF 2OO5

In terms of Section 47(4) of the Banking Act No. 30 of 1988 as amended by Bankin-q (Arnendment) Act No. 2of 2005, the Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka has approved the following limits in respectof accommodation ,eranted by a licensed commercial bank to a director or to a close relation of such directorwith effect from ll'h Februarv. 2005.a) In the case of accommodation secured by cash or near cash collateral (itemsDetermination issued by the Morretary Board in terms of Section 47(3) of the Bankingas amended by Bankin-e (Amendrnent) Act No. 2 of 2005, upto the lirnit of he securityof the said Determination.b) In the case of accomrnodation secured by otherHundred Thousand (Rs. 500,000/-)c) In the case of accomrnodation by way of issue of a(Rs. 500,000/-), provided that such accommodationcustomers of the respective bank.

ColornboI I February 2005

02t041004/0010/001

To: Tlte CEOs of Licensed Corttntercial Banks and

Licensed Specialised Bartks

Dear Sir,

types of approved securities,

(a) to (e) of theAct No. 30 of 1988permitted in terms

upto Rupees Five

credit card, upto Rupees Five Hundred Thousandis on the same terms and condition as for other

Sgd. Sunil MendisGovernor

Bank Supervision Departmentl8 Februarv 2OO5

SUBMISSION OF THE MONTHLY & QUARTERLY COMPLIANCE REPORTS

I refer to the BSD Circular dated 26 October 2001 and the discussion on the above subject at the meetin-s oftl-re CEOs of Licensed Commercial Banks (LCBs) and Licensed Specialised Banks (LSBs) held onr1 .02.2005.

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005(iii)

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

As agreed, all banks areCornpliance Reports subrnitted toThis will be effective for the

c.c. - Secretary General/SLBA

02t04t003/0400/001

To: The CEOs of Licensed Comntercial Banks andLicensed Specialised Banks

Dear Sir.

hereby inforrned that the CEO of the respective bank should sign thethis Department on a lnonthly and quarterly basis.

Compfiance Reports to be subrnitted for the month of February 2005 onwards.

Yours faithfully,Sgd. Director of Bank Supervision

Bank Supervision Department18 Februarv 2005

Reference our Circulars B5/62197 dated 29.O1.1999 and 02/04100310400/001 dated 30.01.2003 on theabove subject, and the discussion at the meeting of the CEOs of Licensed Commercial Banks (LCBs) andLicensed Specialised Banks (LSBs) on 17.02.2005.All LCBs and LSBs are hereby informed that as agreed, the following statutory and prudential ratios shouldalso be disclosed in the publication of quarterly and annual publication of financial statements in the press:' The Statutory Capital Adequacy Ratio' The Statutory Liquid Assets Ratio (Domestic Banking Unit and Off-shore Banking Unit to beindicated separately)' Non-performing Advances Ratio (Gross NPA Ratio and the Net NPA Ratio)This circular will be applicable for the financial statements of banks corilnencing from the l't Quarter of 2005.

Yours faithfully,Sgd. Director of Bank Supervisionc.c. - Secretary General/SlBA

Bank Supervision Department7 March 2OO5To: All Licensed Corrtntercial Banks

Dear Sir/Madam,

I enclose herewith the above Directions, which would take effect from today.Please acknowledge receipt.Yours faithfully,Director of Bank Supervision

(iv)Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2OOs

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

BANKING ACT NO. 30 OF 1988 AS AMENDED BY BANKING (AMENDMENT)

by the Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka under Section a6(1Xc) of the30 of 1988 as amended by the Bankin-e (Arnendrnent) Act No. 33 of 1995 and BankingNo. 2 of 2005.

Directions issuedBanking Act No.(Arnendrnent) Act

Colombo7 March 2005

Sunil Mendis

Governor

l. These Directions may be cited as the Bankin-e Act (Single Borrower Limit) Directions No.2 of 2005and shall have effect from 7'h day of March, 2005.2. A licensed commercial bank shall not grant accommodation exceeding thirty per cent (3OVo) of thecapital funds of such bank as at the end of its preceding financial year to any one customer belongingto a category referred to in Section a6(lXcXi) of tlre Banking Act No.30 of 1988 as amended by Banking(Amendment) Act No.33 of 1995 and Banking (Arnendment) Act No.2 of 2005 (hereinafter referred to asthe "Act") or in the ag-qre-qate to customers belonging to the categories in respect of whomaccommodation is required to be aggregated in terms of Section a6(lXcXii) of the Act.3. If accornmodation granted to any one customer belonging to a category referred to in Section 46(l)(c)(i) orin the ag-qre-eate to any customers belonging to the categories in respect of wlrom accommodation isrequired to be aggre,qated in terms of Section a6(lXc)(ii) exceeds fifteen per cent (15%) of the capital fundsof the licensed commercial bank, accommodation granted in a,e-eregate to all such customers should alsonot exceed fifty per cent (50Vo) of total accommodation of such bank as at the end of the precedingfinancial year.4. For the purpose of computing the maximum amount of accommodation that could be granted under paragraphs2 and 3, the existing facility limits or the outstanding amounts of all accomrnodation, whichever is more, andgranted before or after the date on which these Directions take effect shall be taken into account.5. The Single Borrower Lirnit in respect of accomrnodation granted by a Dornestic Banking Unit and anOff-Shore Banking Unit of a licensed commercial bank to any one custorner belonging to a categoryreferred to in Section 46(l)(cXi) of the Act or in the ag-eregate to customers belonging to the categoriesin respect of whom accommodation is required to be ag-qregated in terms of Section 46(lXc)(ii) of theAct shall, when aggregated, not exceed the limits specified in paragraphs 2 and 3.6. Accommodation granted against the security of the items (i) to (iv) indicated below to any customersbelonging to the categories referred to in Section 46(l)(cXi) or Section a6(l)(cXii) of the Act shall beexcluded frorn the Sinele Borrower Lirnit:(i) Cash.(ii) Government/Central Bank Securities.(iii) Treasury/Central Bank Guarantees.(iv) Guarantees issued by Asian Developrnent Bank, International Development Association, WorldBank or other Institutions acceptable to the Central Bank of Sri Lanka.7. A licensed commercial bank Inay -qrant accommodation in excess of the limits specified in paragraphs 2 and 3:(i) to the Ceylon Petroleutn Corporation;(ii) to the Ceylon Electricity Board;(iii) to the Co-operative Wholesale Establishrnent; or(iv) to a customer/custotners to whom accommodation is to be granted for use directly in aninfrastructure developrnent project provided that(a) the custolner/customers has/have been awarded a contract to directly en-qa-se in aninfrastructure development project;(b) such project is funded to the extent of at least fifty per cent (50Vo) by sources outside Sri::|,iffi l,l"'#i'T',:',ill,r"lrt'::::*"#ll,'#lartanks and/or ricensed speciarised banks

(v)Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2OO5

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

(c) such licensed commercial bank has certified in writing to the Director of Bank Supervisionprior to disbursement of the accornmodation that it has satisfied itself that the conditions at(a) and (b) have been met.8. Where a licensed commercial bank increases its capital funds subsequently throu-eh:(i) funds realised from a new share issue or a ri-ghts issue or new assi-ened capital, the Sin_eleBorrower Lirnits under para-eraphs 2 and 3 rnay be calculated on the basis of the increased capitalfunds from the date on which the proceeds of the share issue, rights issue or new assignedcapital were received by the bank and accounted for in its books;(ii) current year's profits by capitalising suclr profits, the Single Borrower Limits under para_eraphs 2and 3 may be calculated on the basis of the increased capital funds, provided that such increasein the capital funds is certified by the External Auditor.9. If a licensed commercial bank incurs losses durin-e the current year or if its capital funds are reducedfor any reasoll including payrnent of dividends or repatriation of profits, the Single Borrower Lirnitsunder paragraplrs 2 and 3 should be calculated on the basis of the reduced capital funds.l0.Licensed commercial banks incorporated outside Sri Lanka who had hitherto based their SingleBorrower Lirnits on tl'reir advances in accordance with the Banking Act (Single Borrower Limit)Directions No. 2 of 1999 and the Circular on Single Borrower Limit dated 16 July, 2004, and haveinsufficient capital funds to maintain the Single Borrower Lirnits as stipulated in these directions to meetthe current accomrnodation are -qranted tirne till 30 June, 2005 to infuse at least fifty per cent (SOVo) of theshortfall of capital funds and till 3l December,2005 to infuse the balance capital funds to cornply withthe Single Borrower Lirnits stipulated by these Directions.ll. Where any licensed commercial bank contravenes these Directions, such bank shall not repatriateprofits or pay dividends as long as it continues to contravene such Directions.

12. These Directions replace the Banking Act (Single Borrower Limit) Directions No. 2 of 1999 as amendedon 24 Decernber,2002 and l8 November,20O3 and the Circular dated 16 July, 2004 issued to licensedcommercial banks incorporated outside Sri Lanka on Sin-ele Borrower Limit.

Bank Supervision Department17 March 2005To : CEOs of Licensed Specialised Banks

Dear Sir,

ACCOMMODATION TO DIRECTORS & RELATED COMPANIESAs intimated to you at the Meeting of the CEOs of Licensed Commercial Banks (LCBs) & LicensedSpecialised Banks (LSBs) held on 17.03.2005, the Directions to LSBs on the above subject have beenamended to be consistent with tlre Directions issued to the LCBs in this re_eard.Please find enclosed the amendment to the Direction issued under Section 76J(l) of the Banking Act.

Yours faithfully,Sgd. Director of Bank Supervisionc.c. : Secretary General/SLBA

BANKING ACT NO. 30 OF 1988 AS AMENDED By BANKING IAMENDMENT)ACT NO. 33 OF 1995 AND ACT NO. 2 OF 2OO5

Amendment to the directions issued16J(I) of the Banking Act No. 30 of

Colornbo17 March 2005

by the Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka under Sectiorr1988 as amended by Act No. 33 of 1995 and Act No. 2 of 2005.

Sgd. Sunil MendisGovernor

(vi)Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Repofi- 2005

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

Direction on Accomodation to Directors and Related Companies dated 21.11.97 issued by the MonetaryBoard is hereby amended as follows:l. By the repeal of sub section l.l and substitution therefor of the followin-e:1.1 "any of its directors or to a close relation of such director exceedin-e Rupees Five Hundred Thousand(Rs. 500,000/-), and except where such accomrnodation is provided by tl're issue of a credit card, suchaccommodation is secured by such specified security as set out in section 7 below.Where the accommodation is provided by the issue of a credit card, the limit applicable shall beRupees Five Hundred Thousand (Rs. 500,000/-) provided that such accommodation is on the sameterms and conditions as for other customers of the respective bank.

However, where the accommodation is secured by the security specified at subsection 7.I to 7.5 below,accommodation may be granted upto the limit of the security permitted in the relevant subsection."2. By the insertion of section 6.1 immediately after section 6:6.1 "'Where any accommodation is granted by a licensed specialised bank under section l duringthe course of any financial year, such accommodation shall be disclosed in the accounts for thatfinancial year and for each subsequent financial year till such accommodation has been repaid orsettled in full."The above amendment will be operative with immediate effect.

BANKING ACT NO. 30 OF 198E AS AMENDED BY BANKING (AMENDMENT)ACT NO. 33 OF T995 AND BANKING (AMENDMENT) ACT NO. 2 OF 2OO5

Directions issued by the Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka under Section 76J(I) of theBankin-e Act No. 30 of 1988 as amended by the Banking (Amendment) Act No. 33 of 1995 and Banking(Amendment) Act No. 2 of 2005.

Sgd. Sunil MendisGovernorColombo18 March 2OO5

BANKING ACT (SINGLE BORROWER LIMIT)DIRECTIONS NO. 3 OF 2OO5

l. These Directions may be cited as the Banking Act (Single Borrower Lirnit) Directions No.3 of 2005and shall have effect from the 21" day of March, 2005.2. A licensed specialised bank havin-e an equity capital as defined in the Banking Act shall not grantaccolnmodation exceeding thirty per cent (3OC/o) of the capital funds of such bank as at the end of itsprecedin-e financial year:2.1 to any one company, public corporation, firm, association of persons or individuals;2.2 in the aggregate to:2.2-l an individual, his close relations or to a company or firm in which he has a substantial interest;

2-2.2 a company and any or Inore of the following2.2.2.1 its subsidiaries;2.2.2.2 its lroldin-q company;2.2.2.3 its associate company;

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005( vii)

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

2.2.2.4 a subsidiary of its holding companyi or2.2.2.5 a company in which such company or its subsidiary, or its holdin,s company, or asubsidiary of its holding company has a substantial interestIf accotnmodation granted to any one custorner belongin-e to a cate-qory referred to at para,sraph 2.2.1 or in theaggregate to any custolners belon-ein-e to the cate-eories in respect of whorn accolnlnodation is requiled to bea-egre-eated in terms of para-eraph2.2.2 above exceeds fifteen per cent (ISVI) of the capital funds of the licensedspecialised bank, accommodation -qranted in ag,gre-qate to all such custorners should also not exceed fifty percent (507r,) of total accommodation of such bank as at the errd of the precedin_q financial year.For the purpose of computin-e the maximum amount of accommodation that could be granted underparagraphs 2 and 3, the existin,e facility limits or the outstandillg amounts of all accolnmodation,whichever is more, and -eranted before or after the date on which these Directions take effect shall betaken into account.5. Accommodation -eranted against the security of tlre items 5.1 to 5.4 indicated below to any customersbelon-eing to the categories referred to in paragraph 2.1 above or para-qraph 2.2 above shall beexcluded from the Sinele Borrower Limit:5.1 Cash.5.2 Government/Central Bank Securities.5.3 Treasury/Central Bank Guarantees.5.4 Guarantees issued by Asian Development Bank, International Development Association, WorldBank or other Institutions acceptable to the Central Bank of Sri Lanka.6. A licensed specialised bank may grant accommodation in excess of the limits specified in paragraphs 2 and 3:6.1 to the Ceylon Petroleum Corporation;6.2 to the Ceylon Electricity Board;6.3 to the Co-operative Wholesale Establishment; or6.4 to a customer/customers to whom accornmodation is to be granted for use directlv in aninfrastructure development project provided that:6.4.I the customer/customers has/have been awarded a contract to directly engage in aninfrastructure development project;6.4.2 such project is funded to the extent of at least fifty per cent (507o) by sources outsideSri Lanka or by a consortium of licensed commercial banks and/or licensed specialisedbanks excludin_e the bank granting the accommodation; and6.4.3 such licensed specialised bank has certified in writing to the Director of BankSupervision prior to disbursement of the accommodation that it has satisfied itself thatthe conditions at 6.4,1 and 6.4.2 have been met.7. Where a licensed specialised bank increases its capital funds subsequently throu_eh:7.L funds realised from a new share issue or a rights issue, the Single Borrower Limits underpara-eraphs 2 and 3 may be calculated on the basis of the increased capital funds from the dateon which the proceeds of the share issue or the rights issue were received by the bank andaccounted for in its books:1.2 current year's profits by capitalising such profits, the Sin-ele Borrower Limits under paragraphs 2and 3 may be calculated on the basis of the increased capital funds, provided that such increasein the capital funds is certified by the External Auditor.8. If a licensed specialized bank incurs losses during the current year or if its capital funds are reduced forany reason including payment of dividends, the Single Borrower Limits under para-eraphs 2 and 3should be calculated on the basis of the reduced capital funds.9. Where any licensed specialised bank contravelres these Directions, suclr bank shall not pay dividendsas long as it continues to contravene such Directions.

10. These Directions replace the Banking Act (Single Borrower Lirnit) Directions dated 21.11.1997 asamended on l8 Novernber 2003.

3.

4.

( viii)Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2OO5

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

02t04t002to0r2too2

To: The CEOs of Licensed Comnrcrcial Banks (Donrcstic) andLicensed Specialised Banks

Dear Sir,

Bank Supervision Department3l March 2005

APPOINTMENT OF DIRECTORS OF BANKS

In terms of Sectiolt 42(l) of the Barrking Act a person who is to be appointed, elected or nominated as adirector of a licensed commercial bank or who continues as a director of such bank must be a fit and properperson to hold such office and should not be prevented from doing so by the provisions of the Banking Actor by any otlrer written law. The Act also sets out specific matters to be taken into consideration indetermining whether a person is fit and proper.Further, in terms of Section 42(4) of the Act, all banks are required to notify the Director of BankSupervision, details of proposed/appointed/elected/nominated directors for approval under Section 42(5\-Boards of licensed commercial banks should ensure that adequate information relatin-e to any person who isto be appointed, elected or nominated to the Board of Directors is made available to the Board before suclrappointment, election or nomination takes place. Furthermore, it is necessary that relevant information inrespect of current directors should also be available to the Board of Directors.For this purpose we annex hereto a draft affidavit to be obtained from all directors and personsnominated for election or appointrnent as directors of the bank or to be nominated to the Board. In addition tothe affidavit, a declaration may also be obtained from such person to enable the bank to ascertain complianceby directors of the bank with other provisions of the Act. For this purpose a draft declaration as in Annex 2may be used. The Secretary of each bank shall submit a copy of the affidavit and the declaration in respect ofeach such person to be appointed, to the Director of Bank Supervision, together with the information specifiedin sub-section (a) of Section 42, by the bank when approval for appointment, election or nomination of adirector is sought.With respect to current directors, the declaration and affidavit should be obtained and copies furnishedto the Central Bank in respect of each director holding office, by 30 April 2005. Thereafter, the declarationand affidavit should be obtained and copies furnished to the Central Bank annually, before the AnnualGeneral Meeting of the respective bank in respect of every continuing director.

Yours faithfully,Director of Bank Supervisionc.c. - Mr Upali De SilvaSecretary General - Sri Lanka Bankers AssociationLevel 8, Ceylinco House 69, Janadhipathi MawathaColombo 01

AFFIDAVIT TO BE SUBMITTED IN TERMS OF SECTION 42(2) OF THEBANKING ACTI, of ... Bein-e a [Buddhist solemnly, sincerely andtruly declare and affirm/ Christian/Catholic make oath and state/ Muslim make oath and statel as follows :(a) I arn the [affirmant / deponent] abovenamed and I [am a diiector / have been elected as a director /have been nominated as a director] of ... which is a licensed comrnercialbank / licensed specialized bank, licensed under the Bankin-q Act No. 30 of 1988.(b) I [affirm/state] that I possess the followin-e acadernic and/or professional qualifications :(c) I Iaffinn/state] that the effective experience that I possess in bankin-e, finance, business oradministration or of any other relevant discipline is as follows :(d) I Iaffirm/state] that tlrere is no findirr-e of any regulatory or supervisory authority, professionalassociation, any Comrnission of Inquiry, tribunal or other body established by law irr Sri Lanka orabroad, to the effect that I have comrnitted or have been connected with the commission of, any actwlrich involves fraud, deceit, dishonesty or any other irnproper conduct;

(ix)Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

(e) I [affirrn/state] that as such I am not subject to any investi-eation or inquiry in Sri Lanka or elsewhereby any re-eulatory authority, or supervisory authority, professional association, any Conrrnission ofInquiry, tribunal or other body established by law in Sri Lanka or abroad, tlrat I have comrnitted or havebeen connected with the comrnission of, any act wlriclr involves fraud, deceit, dishonesty or any otherirnproper conduct;(f) I [affirm/state] that I lrave not been convicted by any Court in Sri Lanka or abroad in respect of a crimecornmitted in connection with financial mana-qement or of arry offence involvin_e rnoral turpitude;

(-e) I laffirm/state] that I arn not an undischarged insolverrt nor have I been declared a bankrupt in Sri Lankaor abroad;(h) I [affirm/state] that I lrave not failed, to satisfy any jud-ement or order of any court whether in Sri Lankaor elsewhere, or to repay a debt;(i) I [affirrn/state] that I have not been declared by a competent court in Sri Lanka or abroad, to be ofunsound mind;0) I [affirm/state] that I have not been removed or suspended by an order of a re-eulatory or supervisoryauthority frorn serving as a director, Chief Executive Officer or other officer in any bank or financialinstitution or corporate body, in Sri Lanka or abroad;(k) I [affirm/state] that I have not been a director, Chief Executive Officer or held any other position ofauthority in any bank or financial institution -(i) whose license has been suspended; or(ii) whiclr has been wound up or is being wound up,whether in Sri Lanka or elsewhere.or which is being compulsorily liquidated;

(l) I [affirm/state] that to the best of my knowled-ee I am a fit and proper person [to hold office as adirector / to be appointed, nominated or elected as a director] of a licensed commercial bank / licensedspecialised bank in terms of the provisions of Section 42 of the Banking Act as amended by Banking(Amendment) Act No. 2 of 2005.

The averments contained hereinwere read over to the [affirmant/deponentwho having understood the contentshereof and having accepted same astrue, swore to and placed his/her si,enatureat Colombo on this ..day of

Name of Bank:Declaration

Before me

JUSTICE OF THE PEACE

Annex 2

to be submitted in terms of Section 42 of the Banking Act by persons proposed to be/appointed/elected/nominated as a Director of a Licensed Bank(with enclosures as appropriate as of .......)l. Personal Detailsl.l Full name:1.2 NIC No./Passport No.:1.3 Permanent Address:I.4 Present Address:1.5 Occupation:2. List of close relations in terrns of Sectiorr 86 of tlre Bankine Act:2.1 Name in full of spouse:NIC No./Passport No. :

(x)Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

2.2 Names of dependent children:Full Narne NIC No./ Passport No.l.

2.

3.

4.3. List of entities irr which director/prospective director has a substantial interest in terms of Section 86of the Bankin-e Act4. Name/s of Licensed Bank/s in which helshe is or has been a mernber of the Board of Directors (givedetails of period during which such office was held)5. Accornodation, if any, presently availed by hirn/her or by his close relations at 2 above, and byentities at 3 above frorn the bank. and collateral

Declaration:I confirrn that the above infonnation is to the best of rny knowled-ee and belief true and cornplete. Iundertake to keep the bank fully informed, as soon as possible, of all events which take place subsequentlywhich are relevant to tlre information provided above.

Date:Signature

Any other explarration/informatiorl in regard to the information fumished above and other informationcorrsidered relevant for assessing the suitability of the proposed/appointed director.Remarks of Board of Directors of the Bank

DateSignature of Cornpany Secretary

02n714021007 31001Bank Supervision Department12 April 2005To: CEOs of all Licensed Comntercial Banks

Dear Sir,ENHANCEMENT OF MINIMUM CAPITAL REQUIREMENTS OF BANKS

As intirnated to you at the meetin-e lreld on 08.04.2005, as part of its responsibility to maintain financialsystem stability and in the interest of a stron,q and sound banking system, the Monetary Board of the CentralBank of Sri Lanka has decided to require all licensed commercial banks to increase their capital to Rs. 2,500rnn. For this purpose capital shall mean the Tier I capital (Core Capital) as defiued by the Directions dated22.08.1997 issued by the Monetary Board under Section l9(2) and l9(7) of the Bankin-e Act as arnendedfrom tirne to time. Commercial banks that do not currently rneet this requirement may enhance their capitalin the following manner.. The current capital should be enhanced by at least 50Vc of the deficiency by the end of 2006; ando the balance of the deficiency should be met by tlre end of 2007.All cornrnercial banks are required to meet the enhanced capital requirernents within the stipulated periods,The Monetary Board has also determined, subject to the concurrence of the Hon. Minister of Finance,that, witlr irnrnediate effect the required equity capital for a new cornmercial bank should be Rs. 2,500 rnn andthat the present requirement on forei-en banks to remit the surn of US $ 2 rnn under the provisions of Section4(l) of tl-re Bankin,q Act should be waived.

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005(xi )

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

You are kindly requested to assess the present position of your bank vis-i-vis the enhanced capitalrequiretnents based on the audited financials for the last financial year and inform me of the position by 30June 2005, alon-e with a tirne bound plan for capital au,ementation in case the level of capital is below thestipulated minirnum capital requirement.Fultlrer, you are requested to be rnindful of the enhanced capital requirements when decidin_q ondeclaration of dividends or repatriation of profits.Please acknowledge receipt.

Yours faithfully,Sgd. Director of Bank SupervisionCopy to: Mr Upali de SilvaSecretary GeneralSri Lanka Banks' Association (Gte) Ltd.Level 8, Ceylinco HouseColombo I

02n7 t402t0073t00rBank Supervision Department12 April 2005To: CEOs of all Licensed Specialised Banks

Dear Sir,

As intirnated to you at the rneeting held on 08.04.2005, as part of its responsibility to maintain financial systemstability and in the interests of a strong and sound bankin-q system, tl're Monetary Board of the Central Bank of SriLanka has decided to require all licensed specialised banks to increase their capital to Rs. I,500 mn. For thispurpose capital shall mean the Tier I capital (Core Capital) as defined by the Directions dated 21.11.1997 issuedby the Monetary Board under Section 16J(I) of the Banking Act as amended from tirne to time. Specialised banksthat do not currently meet this requirement may enhance their capital in the following manner.o The current capital should be enlranced by at least 5OVo of the deficiency, by the end of 2006; ando the balance of the deficiency should be met by the end of 2007.All specialised banks are required to meet the enhanced capital requirements within the stipulated periods.The Monetary Board has also decided that with irnrnediate effect the required equity capital for a newspecialized bank should be Rs. 1,500 mn.The enhanced capital requirernents will not apply to the Regional Development Banks for the time being.You are kindly requested to assess the present position of your bank vis-I-vis the enhanced capitalrequirements based on the audited financials for the last financial year and inforrn me of the position by 30June 2005, alon-8 witlr a time bound plan for capital au-ementation in case the level of capital is below thestipulated minimum capital requirement.Further, you are requested to be mindful of the enhanced capital requirernents when decidin_e ondeclaration of dividends.Please acknowledge receipt.

Yours faitlrfully,Sgd. Director of Bank Supervision

Copy to: Mr Upali de SilvaSecretary GeneralSri Lanka Banks' Association (Gte) Ltd.Level 8, Ceylinco HouseColombo I

( xii)Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

The recent amendments ro the Banking Act permit banks to introduce banking products based on Islamicprinciples. Several banks have requested pennission from CBSL in this regard.

11 order to ensure that all banking operations, be it conventional banking or Islarnic Banking, areconducted in a prudential manner, the following regulatory framework will apply:l. The Islamic Banking operations should be conducted strictly within the existing re,eulatory frameworkapplicable to the licensed banks.2. T5e respective banks should maintain separate books of accounts for their Islamic Banking Operations.3. Data on Islamic Bankin-e should be included under a separate column in the statutory returns submitted toCBSL in order to enable a clear demarcation between the accounts relating to conventional banking andIslamic Banking.4. The prudenrial re*eulations that apply to conventional banking operations will apply equally toIslamic Bankin,e business and banks are advised to strictly follow the existing regulations. If anydeviations are observed, such banks will be required to immediately cease the continuation of therelevant operations.

The CBSL will write individually to the banks that have inquired in this regard.

Distributed at the meeting of the CEOs of LCBs and LSBs held on 19 May 2005

Bank Supervision Department29 Julv 2005

To: the CEOs of Licensed Commercial Banks

Dear Sirs,REOUEST TO MAINTAIN CAPITAL IN FOREIGN CURRENCY

With the increase in the minimum capital requirement of banks, several licensed commercial banksincorporated abroad have requested the Central Bank (CBSL) to permit them to maintain at least part of thecapital in foreign currency. In order to accommodate this request, the Monetary Board of the Central Bankhas determined as follows:l. A maximum amount of 50 per cent of the new capital that is brought in to be maintained in foreigncurrency. The balance 50 percent should be converted to Rupees and maintained in the DomesticBanking Unit of the bank.2. Twenty five per cent (25Vo) of the new capital to be brou-eht in (50 per cent of the above) will have tobe maintained as a non-interest bearing reserve with the Central Bank.3. Twenty five per cent (25Vo) of the new capital to be brought in to be retained in the Off-Shore BankingUnit (OSBU) to be utilized only for lending to BOI companies. Any amount that cannot be lent in thislnanner to be deposited in the reserve account with the CBSL.4. The appreciation/depreciation in the capital maintained in foreign currency in Rupee terms, to becredlteO-ldebited to a separate account named 'Exchange Equalisation Account' which should not beincluded as part of capital for prudential purposes. The rupee amount of capital account shouldcontinue to be shown at the exchange rate prevailin,e on the day that the capital was brought in.5. CBSL reserves the right to request the banks to convert all or part of capital in foreign currency to

Rupees in order to off-set operational losses.

Please acknowled-ee receipt' yours faithfully,SSd. Director of Bank SuPervision

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005( xiii )

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

02t041002t0r01t002Bank Supervision DepartlnentI I August 2005To: tlte CEOs of Licertsed Conunercial BanksDear Sirs.

As announced at the Meeting of the CEOs of Licensed Comrnercial Banks and Licensed Specialised Barrks,the Direction amendin-e the existin-e Direction No. 2 of 2005 on the Single Borrower Lirnit is enclosed herewith.Please acknowled-ee receipt.Yours faithfully,Sgd. Director of Bank Supervision

Direction issued by the Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka under Section a6(t)(c) of theBankin-s Act, No. 30 of 1988 as amended by the Banking (Arnendment) Act No. 33 of 1995 and Banking(Amendment) Act No. 2 of 2005.

Sgd. Sunil MendisGovernorColombo10 August 2005

DIRECTION NO. 4 OF 2OO5

The Bankin-e Act (Single Borrower Lirnit) Directions No. 2 of 2005 is hereby arnended as follows.l. Paragraph 4 of the said Directions is repealed and replaced with the following:"4. For purposes of paragraphs 2 and 3, in determinin-q whether accommodation exceeds 3OVo of thecapital funds or l5Va of the capital funds of a licensed commercial bank, tlre existing facility lirnitsor the outstanding amounts of all accommodation, whichever is more shall be taken into account.For purposes of paragraph 3, the total accommodation of a licensed commercial bank as at the end ofthe preceding financial year shall mean the outstandirlg amount of all accomiltodation as at the end ofthe preceding financial year."2. Paragraph 6 of the said Directions is repealed and replaced with the followin-e:"6.(l) Accommodation granted against the security of the following items to customers belon_ein,e tothe categories referred to in Section a6(lXcXi) or Section 46(l)(cXii) of the Act shall be excludedfrom the computarion of the Single Borrower Limit:(a) Cash;(b) Government/Central Bank Securities;(c) Treasury/Central Bank Guarantees;(d) Guarantees issued by the Asian Developrnent Bank, International DevelopmentAssociation and the World Bank.(e) Subject to the terms and conditions stipulated in subparagraphs (3) and (4) below;(i) Accommodation granted against the security of a -quarantee or sirnilar instrument, asdetermined to be acceptable by the Director of Bank Supervision issued by a bankwhich is incorporated outside Sri Larrka or a Licensed Cornrnercial Bank incorporatedin Sri Lanka or a Licensed Specialised Bank incorporated in Sri Lanka; or(ii) Accommodation -eranted a-eainst the security of a ,quarantee or an indemnity or anundertakin-e issued by the head office of a Licensed Cornmercial Bank which isincorporated outside Sri Lanka,

(xiv)Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005

Major Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

(3) A -quarantee or sirnilar instrument issued by an institution listed under subparagraph (e) aboveshall be acceptable subject to the followin-e terms and conditiorts:(a) The institution shall be a hi-ehly rated institution with a credit rating of A- arrd above (orequivalent), rated by a credit ratin-e a-eency acceptable to the Monetary Board of theCentral Bank of Sri Lanka.(b) The percentage of the value of accornmodation that rnay be excluded from the cornputationof the sin-ele borrower lirnit shall be as follows:

Credit ratin-e 7o of principal value exernptedAAA to AA- (or equivalent) 80VoA+ to A- (or equivalent) 50Vo(c) The ag-eregate of all accommodation excluded on the above basis shall not exceed 100 percent of the capital funds of the bank.(d) Tlre bank concerned shall be satisfied that the credit rating assigned to the bank providingthe guarantee is current aud has not fallen due for review, and that the Director of BankSupervision shall be notified of any chan,ee with irnmediate effect and the accommodationgranted should be revised accordingly at the earliest credit review.(4) In addition to the terms and conditions stipulated under subparagraph (3) above, an undertaking oran indemnity issued by the Head Office of a Licensed Commercial Bank incorporated outside SriLanka shall be acceptable subject to tlre following terms and conditions:(a) To consider an exclusion from the Single Borrower Lirnit for an accommodation granted underParagraph 6(eXii) above, the approval of the Director of Bank Supervision of the Central Bank of SriLanka should be obtained prior to the granting of such accommodation.(b) In the event of default of the customer on whose behalf the undertaking/indemnity is issued, thehead office shall irnmediately rernit the amount -euaranteed to the domestic banking unit in SriLanka, and the branch will not repatriate any profits or head office expenses until such amounthas been received by the Colornbo branch of the bank concerned."3. Paragraph 7(iv) of the said Directions shall be repealed and replaced with the following:"(iv) to a customer/customers to whom accommodation is to be granted for the use of fundsdirectly in an infrastructure development project provided that,(a) the infrastructure development project is a project as described in Annex I hereto;(b) the customer/customers has/have been awarded a contract to directly engage in aninfrastructure developrnent project;(c) such project is funded to the extent of at least fifty per cent (SOVo) by sources outside Sri Lankaor by a consortium of licensed comrnercial banks and/or license specialised banks excludin,ethe bank ,eranting the accommodation; and(d) such licensed commercial bank has certified to the Director of Bank Supervision of the CentralBank of Sri Lanka prior to the disbursement of the accommodation that it has satisfied itselfthat the conditions (a), (b) and (c) above stipulated herein have been met.(e) Lending for infrastructure projects in terms of this sub para-eraph shall not exceed fifty per cent(SOVo) of the capital funds of the bank as at the end of the preceding financial year."4. These Directions will be effective with irnrnediate effect.

Annex IThe definition of infrastructure lending that would qualify for exemption under paragraph7(iv) of the Direction on Single Borrower Limit

Accommodation extended by banks to an infrastructure facility as specified below will qualify forexemption frorn the Sin-ele Borrower Limit under Section 7(iv) of the Direction. A credit facility providedto a company en-eaged in:o Developin-e or. Operating and rnaintaining oro Developing, operating, upgradin-e and rnaintaining any infrastructure facility that is a project in any ofthe following sectors, or any infrastructure facility of a similar nature :i. a road, including toll road, a bridge or a rail system;ii. a highway project includin-e other activities being an integral part of the hi-ehway project;

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005(xv )

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

iii. a port, airport, inland waterway or inland port;iv. a water supply project, irrigation project, water treatment system, sanitation and seweragesystem or solid waste management system;v. telecommunication services whether basic or cellular, including radio paging, network oftrunking, broadband network and internet servrces;vi. an industrial park or special economic zone;vii. generation or generation and distribution of powerviii. tansmission or distribution of power by laying a network of new transmission or distribution lines.ix. construction relatin-q to projects involving agro-processing and supply of inputs to agriculture;x. construction of educational institutions and hospitalsxi. any other infrastructure facility of similar nature

02t08t006t000u002Bank Supervision Departentl1 August 2005To: the CEOs of Licensed Specialised BanksDear Sirs,ANNUAL LICENSE FEES OF LICENSED SPECIALISED BANKS

Please find enclosed the Determination made by the Monetary Board with regard to the annual license fee ofLicensed Specialised Banks which will be effective from 0l January 20O6.

Yours faithfully,Sgd. Director of Bank Supervision

BANKING ACT

Determinations made by the Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka under Section 76D. (6) of theBanking Act.

Sgd. Sunil MendisGovernorColombol0 August 2005

DETERMINATION NO. 2 OF 2OO5I By virtue of the provisions of Section 76D. (6), the Monetary Board lras determined that with effectfrom l" January, 2006 every Licensed Specialized Bank shall pay an ann'ral licence fee of Rs.100,000/- for each calendar year.2 Every Licensed Specialized Bank shall pay the respective licence fee to the Central Bank of Sri Lankaby 3lo January each year.3 Every Licensed Specialized Bank licerrsed in future, shall pay the annual licence fee for the firstcalendar year of operations before the issue of the licence.

(xvi)Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2OO5

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

02t04t002t00t8t001Bank Supervision Department12 Au-eust 2005To: CEOs of Licensed Comntercial Banks

Dear Sirs,

Further to my circular dated 29 July 2005 on the above subject, informing tlre Licensed Commercial Banksof the decision of the Monetary Board to permit part of the new capital of banks that is brought in, to bemaintained in foreign currency.2. The operatin-e procedure for maintaining part of the capital as a reserve with the Central Bank of SriLanka, for the banks that wish to exercise the option is as follows:2.1 Deposits may be made only in the following desi-enated currencies:. US Dollarso Pounds Sterlingo Euro2.2 The amount of capital that is required to be maintained with the CBSL should be depositedwith the CBSL's current accounts, depending on the currency as follows:

Currency US Dollars Euro Pounds Sterling

Bank name Federal Reserve Bank, Deutsche Bundesbank, HSBC plc,New York Frankfurt LondonAccount No SRILA 021083514 5040040828 39600144Swift Code FRNYU33 MARKDEFF MIDLGBZ?

2.3 Upon transfer of funds to any of the CBSL's above accounts by the commercial banks, the bankconcerned should inforrn the undersigned (stating the amounts and the value dates of thedeposits) with copy to the Chief Accountant of the CBSL.3. Since the deposits are linked to the capital of the respective banks, -{enerally, no withdrawals will bepermitted. Requests for any withdrawals should be submitted to the Director of Bank Supervision(DBS) for authorization. The Chief Accountant of the CBSL will not accept any withdrawals that havenot been authorized by the DBS. Further, in view of the timing differences among the financial centreswhere CBSL maintains its reserve funds/investments, a minimum of one day's notice is required by theChief Accountant of CBSL to effect the withdrawal. A minimum of one day's processing time isrequired by the DBS. (Altogether two day's notice required by the CBSL).4. Reporting procedure4.I The capital held in foreign currency in the Off-shore Banking Unit (OSBU) should be reportedin the monthly statement of assets and liabilities of the OSBU, under internal accounts, byinsertin_e an additional row to be named as "Capital held in Foreign Currency".4.2 The reserve account held with the CBSL should be reported as'deposits with the CBSL', underassets 'in Sri Lanka'.5. The reserve account held at CBSL which represents part of the capital held in foreign currency shouldnot be included as a liquid asset, since it is part of capital.6. Submission of capital plansThe banks that have so far not subrnitted their plans for meeting the increased capital requirement arerequested to do so not later than 3l August 2005

Yours faithfully,

Sgd. Director of Bank Supervision

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005( xvii)

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

02t04t003/0401/001Bank Supervision Department30 Septernber 2005To : the CEOs of all Licensed Conunercial Banks andLicensed Specialised BanksDear Sirs,

PUBLIC DISCLOSURE BY PUBLICATION OF QUARTERLY FINANCIALSTATEMENTS OF BANKS IN THE PRESS

As discussed at the rneeting of the CEOs of LCBs held on 28 July 2005, the format for publication ofquarterly financial statements in the press has been revised in consultation with the representative of banks,and is attached herewith, along with the su-egested Sinhala and Tamil translations.2. The revision is aimed at increasing the transparency of banking operations, and to ali-en the publicationrequirements with those of other re-eulators. Accordingly, the formats have been drafted incorporating thedisclosure requirements of the Securities and Exchange Cornmission (SEC)(in respect of listed banks) andthe Sri Lanka Accountin-e Standards, as far as possible. In addition, selected performance indicators,including key prudential ratios have been included, as agreed with the banks.3. The information published should be in respect of the entire bank, i.e. including the off-shore bankingunit and in the case of LCBs incorporated in Sri Lanka, ?fly branches abroad.4. The new format contains two parts viz;o Part I : The format for the summarized balance sheet, income statement, and the statement ofchanges in equity and reserves and selected performance indicatorso Part II : Instructions for Preparation of Bank Accounts for publication in the press5. Balance Sheet inforrnation should be reported as at end of the relevant quarter. Cornparative figures tobe published should be based on the audited financial statements for the previous financial year.5.1 The reporting period in respect of the income statement should be the cumulative position as atthe end of the relevant quarter in the financial year. Comparative figures should be in respect ofthe same reporting period in the previous financial year.5.2 In the case of selected performance indicators, the relevant ratios as at the reporting date slrouldbe reported while the comparative ratios should be based on the audited financial statements forthe previous financial year.6. The publication should be made within two months from the end of each quarter, at least once in anEnglish, Sinhala and Tarnil newspaper. If the bank publishes its annual audited financial statementswithin two months from the end of the financial ye^r, the requirement to publish the financialstatements for the fourth quarter in terms of these instructions would not be mandatory.7. The licensed commercial banks incorporated abroad rnay report information pertaining to the globaloperations of the parent bank, in the column for reporting the information on the Group. Sucltinforrnation may be reported in the currency of the home country or in US Dollars. In view of theheterogeneous character of group accounts of foreign banks, the banks are requested to make everyendeavour to publislr all items given in the agreed format.8. The disclosure requirements contained herein specify the minimum requirements to be adopted by thebanks and all banks are encouraged to make additional disclosures for the benefit of the general public.In addition, the banks listed on the Colombo Stock Exchange should comply with any additionalregulations imposed by the SEC with regard to publication of financial information.9. The revised publication format will be effective for publication of banks' financial statements from the

3'd quarter of 2005 onwards.9.1 The codes indicated in the formats are for cross reference with the definitions in tlre instructionsand not for publication.l0.The circular dated 30 January 2003 on the publicatiorr of quarterly financial statements is herebyrescinded.

Please acknowled-ee receipt of this circular.

Yours faithfully,

Sgd. Director of Bank Supervision

( xviii )Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Beport - 2005

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

FORMAT-SI.]MMERISED BALANCE STIEET

Name of Bank :

Rupees Thousands

Summarised Balance Sheet

Code

On-Balance

r.1.1.0.0l. t .2.0.0l. r .3.0.0

1.1.4.0.01.1.4. 1.0r.t.4.2.0

1.1.s.0.0t.l .5.1.0l.1.5.2.0

1.1 .5.3.0

1.1.6.0.0

1.1.7.0.0r.1.7.1.0Ll.7.l.lr.r .7 .t.21.1.7,1.3t.t.7 .1.4

r.1.7.2.0t.l.7 .2.1t.t .7 .2.2t.t .7 .2.3t.t .'l .2.4| .l .7 .2.5r.1.7.3.0

1 .r.7 .4.0r. r.7.5.01.1.7.6.0r.1.7.4.0

r .l.8,0.0

r . r .9.0.0r.t.10.0.0

1. t. il.0.01.1.r0.0.0On-Balance

1.2.1.0.0r.2. r.l.0t.2.t.2.0t.2.t .3.0|.2.t.4.0r.2.1.5.0

1.2.2.0.0t.2.2.t .0t.2.2.2.0t.2.2.3.0

Item

Sheet Assets

Cash in HandBalances with Central Bank of Sri Lanka/Other Central BanksDue from Banks and Other Financial Institutions

Investments - Trading AccountGovernment SecuritiesOther Securities

Investments - Held-to-Maturity (Net of provisions madeGovernment SecuritiesOther SecuritiesLess: Provision for decline in value of Investments

Investments in Associates and SubsidiariesTotal Loans and AdvancesTotal Performing loans and AdvancesBills of ExchangeOverdraftsLease Rentals ReceivableOther LoansTotal Non-performing loans and AdvancesBills of ExchangeOverdraftsLease Rentals ReceivableOther Loanslnterest ReceivablesTotal Gross Loans and Advances

Less:

Interest in SuspenseSpecific Loan Loss ProvisionsGeneral Loan Loss ProvisionsNet Loans and AdvancesOther Assetslntangible assetsInvestment propertiesFixed Assets (Net of accumulated depreciation)Total on Balance Sheet AssetsSheet Liabilities

Total DepositsDemand DepositsSavings DepositsTime DepositsMargin DepositsOther DepositsTotal BorrowingsBorrowings from CBSLBorrowings from Banks and Financial lnstitutions in Sri LankaBorrowings from Banks and Financial Institutions Abroad

BankGroup

Current Previous Current PreviousPeriod Period Period Period

As at As atDD/MM/YY DD/MM/YY(Audited)

As at As atDD/MM/YY DD/MM/YY(Audited)

fortments)decline in

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005(xix)

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 200s

| .2.2.4.0| .2.2.5.01.2.2.6.0t.2.3.0.0t.2.4.0.0

I .2.5.0.0

1.2.6.0.0

1.3.0.0.0

1.4.0.0.0I .4. r .0.01.4.2.0.01.4.3.0.0

1.5.0.0.0

1.6.0.0.01.6. r .0.0r.6.2.O.0

1.7.0.0.0I .7.l .0.0| .7 .2.0.0

2.1.0.0.02. l.l .0.02.t.2.0.0

2.2.0.0.02.2.1.O.02.2,2.O.0

2.3.0.0.0

2.4.0.O.02.4.1.0.02.4.2.0.0

2.s.0.0.02.5.1,0.0

2.5.2.0.02.5.3.0.02.5.4.O.02.5.5.0.02.5.6.0.0

2.6.0.0.02.6.r.O.02.6.2.t.02.6.3.2.02.6.4.3.0

2.7.0.0.0

2.8.0.0.02.9.0.0.0

2.10.0.0.0

2.11.0.0.02.r2.0.0.0

2.13.0.0.0

2.14.0.0.0

Securities sold under repurchase agreementsSubordinated Term DebtOther BorrowingsDeferred taxationCurrent TaxationOther LiabilitiesTotal on Balance Sheet LiabilitiesMinority InterestsEquity Capital and ReservesShare CapitaUAssigned CapitalStatutory Reserve FundTotal Other ReservesTotal On-Balance Sheet Liabilities and Equity Capital andOff-Balance Sheet Items and Contra AccountsContingenciesCommitments and Contra AccountsMemorandum InformationNumber of EmployeesNumber of Branches

Interest IncomeInterest Income on Loans and AdvancesInterest Income on Other Interest Earning AssetsLess: Interest ExpensesInterest Expense on DepositsInterest Expense on Other Interest Bearing LiabilitiesNet Interest IncomeNon - Interest IncomeForeign Exchange IncomeOther Income

Less: Non - Interest ExpensesPersonnel CostsProvision for Staff Retirement BenefitsPremises, Equipment and establishment ExpensesLoss on Trading/lnvestment SecuritiesAmortization of Intangible AssetsOther Operating ExpensesLess: Provision for Bad and Doubtful Debts and Loans WriProvisions - CeneralProvisions - SpecificRecoveries (-)Loans Written OffLess: Provision for Decline in Value of Investments (Net)Operating Profit on Ordinary Activities Before TaxesLess: Value Added Tax on Financial ServicesOperating Profit on Ordinary Activities Before Corporate TaShare of Subsidiaries/Associate Companies' ProfitOperating Profit Before Corporate TaxLess:Tax on Profits on Ordinary ActivitiesOperating Profit for the Period

Reserves

Summarised Income Statement

(t<x )Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005

oo

q)ulo)xo

U)=.r0)lxq)

A)

:DoEo

I1\)oo(rt

xx.

CodcFor thc Pcriod Endcd (DD/-LM/YYYY)

ltem

3.1.0.0.0 Balance as at DD/MM/YY (Opcning Balance)3.2.1.0.0 l.ssuc of Shales/lncrease of assigned capital3.2.2.0.0 lJonus lssue3.2.3.0-0 Ri-ehts lssue3.2.4.0.0 Surplus on rcvaluation of property3.2.5.0.0 Nct profit for thc period3.2.6.0.0 Transfer to reserves during the period3.2.7.0.0 Dividencl Paid YYYY3.2.8.0.0 Profits Translen'ed to Head office3.2.9.0.0 Others

3.3.0.0.0 Balance as at DD/MM/YY (Closing Balance)

3.f .0.0.0 Balance as at DD/MM/YY (Opening Balance)

3.2. | ,0.0 lssue of Sharcs/lncrease of assigned capital3.2.2.0.0 Bonus Issue3.2.:1.0.0 Rights lssue3.2.4.0.0 Surplus on revaluation of property3.2.5.0.0 Net ptofit for the period3.2.6.0.0 Transfel to leserves during the period3.2.7.0.0 Dividend Paid YYYY3.2.8.0.0 Plofits Tlansferred to Head office3.2.9.0.0 Others3.3.0.0.0 Balance as at DD/MM/YY (Closing Balance)

Statement of Changes In Equity and Reserves-Bank

Statement of Changes In Equity and Reserves-Group

Rupces in Thousancls

Equity CapitalRcserves

Ordinary Ordinary Cumulative AssignedVoting Non-Voting Redeemable CapitalShares Shares PreferenceShares

Reserve Share Revaluation General Other IncomeFund Premium Rcscrve Reserves Reserves State-menl

llS)=

e.o

o-l.la

q)=.(D

o0)o

oa

o-oDooo

o

=oloq)

TDoq)o

J

N)oo(tl

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 200s

Selected Performance Indicators

CurrentPeriod

As atDD/MM/YY

Previous Current PreviousPeriod Period Period

As at As at As atDD/MM/YY DD/MMiYY DD/MM/YY(Audited) (Audited)

Item

4.1.0.0.0 Regulatory Capital Adequacy4.1.1.0.0 Core Capital (Tier I Capital), Rs. Mn4.1.2.0.0 Total Capital Base, Rs. Mn4.1.3.0.0 Core Capital Adequacy Ratio, as % of Risk

Weighted Assets (Minimum Requirement, 5%)4.1.4.0.0 Total Capital Adequacy Ratio, as % ofRisk Weighted Assets (Minimum Requirement, llVo)

4.2.0.0.0 Assets Quality (Quality of Loan Portfolio)4.2.1.0.0 Gross Non - Pefforming Advances Ratio, % (net of

lnterest in Suspense)4.2.2.0.0 Net Non - Performing Advances Ratio, Vo(net of interest in suspense and provisions)

4.3.0.0.0 Profitability4.3.1.0.0 Interest Mary)n, %t4.3.2.0.0 Return on Assets (before Tax). Vo4.3.3.0.0 Return on Equity, 7o4.4.0.0.0 Regulatory Liquidity4.4.1.0.0 Statutory Liquid Assets, Rs.Mn.4.4.2.0.0 Statutory Liquid Assets Ratio,Vo(Minimum Requirement, 20Vo)Domestic Banking unitOff-Shore Banking Unit

CERTIFICATION:

We, the undersigned, being the Chief Executive officer andof .. . . . .. .Bank certify jointly that:-(a) the above statements have been prepared in compliancethe Central Bank of Sri Lanka(b) the information contained in these statements havestatements of the bank unless indicated as audited

Group

the Financial Controller / Cornpliance Officer

with the format and definitions prescribed by

been extracted frorn the unaudited financial

(Name)

(Sgd) Chief Executive OfficerDate:DD/MM/YY

(Name)(Sgd) Financial Controller or Compliance OfficerDate:DD/MM/YY

( xxii )Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

INSTRUCTIONSFOR

30109t2005Bank Supervision Department

Central Bank of Sri Lanka

DETAILED INSTRUCTIONS

1. Balance Sheet-Amounts in Rupees Thousands

Lirte Code Lirte ltentIrtstructiorts

Other Financial InstitutionsL1.3.1.0 Cash Items in Process of Collection (CIPC) LocaVforeign drafts, cheques and other cash equivalent items suchas stocks of valid usable stamps held for customer services, moneyorders, postal orders and traveler's cheques purchased by bank andpayable immediately on presentation.1.1.3.2.O Cash advances (net) through Electronic Cards Cash withdrawn from the bank's ATMs by cardholders (e.g., crediVdebit) of other banks less cash withdrawn from ATMs of otherbanks by cardholders of the bank.

Gold bullion held in the vaults of the bank.1.1.3.4.0 Balances with Licensed Commercial Banks Current accounts maintained at Licensed Commercial Banks(LCBs) in Sri Lanka(LCBs) in Sri Lanka.1.1.3.5.0 Balances with Banks and Financial institutions Balances with Banks and Financial Institutions abroad in NostroAbroad (Nostro Accounts)accounts (as per Bank's Books) maintained to route foreigncurrency transactrons.1.1.3.6.0 Balances with Head office, branches abroad Balances with Head Office and Branches abroad in Nostro accounts

On-Balance Sheet Assets1.f.1.0.0 Cash in Hand

1.1.2.0.0 Balances with Central Bankof Sri Lanka/Other Central Banks

f .1.3.0.0 Due from Banks and

I . |.3.3.0 Gold bullion in hand

(Nostro Accounts)

l.l.3.7.0 Placements with Banks andFinancial institutions in Sri Lankal.1.3.8.0 Placements with Banks andFinancial institutions Abroad

| . I .3 . I 0.0 Reverse Repurchase Agreements withFinancial institutions

l.l.3. | 1.0 Others

1.1.4.0.0 Investments - Trading AICl.l.4.l .0 Covernment Securitiesl.l.4.l .l Treasury Bills

1.1.4.1.2 Treasury Bonds

| .1.4. | .3 Sri Lanka Development Bonds

Local and foreign currency notes and coins held by tellers, inATMs and in vault.

Balance at Central Bank of Sri Lanka/other Central Banks forreserve requirement and other transactions.Sub-total of items I .l .3. | .0 tol. L3.9.0

(as per Bank's Books) maintained to route foreign currencytransactr ons.

Overnight placements and short term placements (< l2 Months)at banks and financial institutions in Sri Lanka.

Overnight placements and short term placements (< l2 Months)at banks and financial institutions abload.1.1.3.9.0 Placement with Head office, branches abroad Overnight placements and short term placements (< 12 Months)Head office and branches abroad.

Lending to Central Bank, Commercial and Specialized Banks.Primary Dealers and Finance Companies against debt instrumentssuch as Treasury Bills and Bonds, Commercial Paper, PromissoryNotes and Debentures.Any other relevant balance not specifically mentioned in any ofthe above account headings-

Sub-total of items I .l .4.I .0 and 1.1.4.2 O.

Sub-total of following items.

Cost of Treasury Bills or Market Value If investment in treasurybills in the trading portfolio are marked to market and carried atthat value in the balance sheet.

Cost of Treasury Bonds or Market Value lf investment in treasurybonds in the trading pol'tfolio are marked to market and carried atthat value in the balance sheet.Cost of Sri Lanka Development Bonds.

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Repod - 2005( xxiii)

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

Lirte Cocle Line ltentIttstructiorts

l.l.4.l-4 Other Government Securities Cost ol market value, whichever is lower, of all other governmentseculities held.1.1.4-2.0 Other Sccurities Sub-total of items 1.1.4.2.1 to 1.1.4.2.4l'1.4.2. I Shares & Unit Trusts - publicly listed Cost or market value, whichever is lower, of ordinary andpreference shares and shares in unit trusts.1.1.4.2.2 Shares & Unit Trusts - not listed Cosr or market value, whichever is lower, of unlisted equity sharesand unlisted shares in unit trusts.1.1.4.2.3 Debt Securities Lower of cost or amount of principal owing on debtinstluments: show net of any unearned interest or discount.l'l'4'2'4 Others Cost or market value, whichever is lower. of all other securitiesheld.1.1.5.0.0 Investments - Held-to-Maturity "Held-to-maturity" securities are securities purchasedwith the intention of holding to maturity. Sub-total ofitems 1.1.5.1.0, 1.1.5.2.0 and 1.1.S.3.01.1-5.1.0 Government Securities Sub-total of items 1.1.5.f.1 to 1.1.5.1.4

I . | .5. I . I Treasury Bills Cost of Treasury Bills| .l .5 . | .2 Treasury Bonds Cost of Treasury Bondsl.l.5.l'3 Sri Lanka Development Bonds Cost of Sri Lanka Development BondsI'1.5.1.4 Other Government Securities Cost of all other government securities held.l-1.5-2.0 Other Securities Sub-total of items 1.1.5.2.1 to t.1.5.2.4l'1.5.2.1 Shares & Unit Trusts - publicly listed Cost of ordinary and preference shares and shares in unit rrusts.1.1.5.2-2 Shares & Unit Trusts - not listed Cost of unlisted equities and unlisted shares in unit trusts.1.1.5.2.3 Debt Securities Lower of cost or amount of principal owing on debt instruments;show net of any unearned interest or discount.1.1.5.2.4 Others Cost of all other securities held.1.f.5.3-0 Less: Provision for decline in value Total Provision made for decline in value of investments.1.1.6-0-0 Investments in Associates and Subsidiaries Total amount of investment in associare and subsidiary companies.1.1.7'0.0 Total Loans & Advances Not need to show values under here.1.1.7.1.0 Total Performing Loans & Advances (Gross) Sub-total of items l.l.Z.l.f b L1.7.1.4l.l.7.l.l Bills of Exchange Toral amount of all type of performing bills of exchange.| .l .7 .l .2 Overdrafts Total amount of all performing overdrafts.| .1.7 .l .3 Lease Rentals Receivable Total amount of all type of performing lease receivables net ofUnearned lease income and VAT recoverable.1.1.7.1.4 Other Loans Toral amount of all type of performing other loans. (Term loans,Block loans, Packing credits, Pledge loans, Lending to customerother than financial institutions against debt instruments (ReverseRepo) such as Treasury Bills and Bonds, Commercial Paper.Prornissory Notes and Debentures and other loans)1.1.7.2.0 Total Non-Performing Loans & Sub-totat of items 1.1.7.2.1 to l.l.7.Z.SAdvances (Gross)l.l'7.2.1 Bills of Exchange Total amount of all type of non-performing bills of exchange.1.1.7.2.2 Overdrafts Total amount of ail non-performing overdrafrs.l.l'7'2.3 Lease Rentals Receivable Total amount of all type of non-performing lease receivables.(netof Uneanred lease income and VAT recoverable)1.1.7 .2.4 Other Loans Toral amount of all rype of non-performing other loans. (Termloans, Block loans, Packing credits, Pledge loans, Lending tocustomer othcr lhan financial institutions asainst debt instrumentsand Debentures and other loans)| '1.'7.2.5 Intrest Receivable Uncollected interest due that has not been debited to respectiveloan/advance accounts1.1.7.3.0 Total Gross Loans & advances The aggregate outstanding amounts (capital and interest)of total perfornring and non-performing loans andadvanccs.1.1.7'4-0 Interest in Suspense Intercst in suspense which is includcd in principal balances of loausand advances or interest receivable as per CBSL Dilections.1.1.7.5.0 Specific Loans Loss Provisiorts Provisions that have been set aside from earnings before tax forspecifically identified loan losses as per CBSL Directions.

( xxiv )Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Repofi - 2005

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

Line Cocle Lirte ltentItt st ructiorts

1.1.7.6.0 General Loans Loss Provisions Provisiorrs that have been set aside frorn eantings before tax forgeneral Ioan losses.

1.1.7 .7.0 Total Net Loans & advances Loans & advances after rretting of iuterest in suspense andall loan loss provisions from gross loans and advances.1.1.8.0.0 Other Assets Sub-total of items 1.1.8.1.0 to 1.1.8.7.0.1.1.8.1.0 Prepaymerrrs and Expendable Supplies Rental deposits, utility deposits. prepaid expenses applicable tofuture period. deposits/advance payments for work in progress,. consumable stocks.

I .1.8.2.0 Suspense account Any unidentified differences in account balances and un-reconciledaccount balances1.1.8.3.0 Accrued Interest Receivable on placements Interest that has accrued but is not yet collected on interest-and Securities bearing placements and securities.1.1.8.4.0 Accounts receivable Expenses paid on behalf of customers pending reimbursement (notrelating to credit exposures), rental receivable, charges and VAT.Any expense incurred on behalf of bouowers should be includedunder loans unless they are charged to the profit and loss accountas an expense.1.1.8.5.0 Corporate tax paid in advance Tax paid but has not yet been set off against tax payable1.1.8.6.0 Inter branch/Head office balances Net balances (or amalgamated balance) of several accounts such as"due from"(Local) account maintained with head office and branches for claimvouchers, branch advices and transactions with branches and thehead office.1.1.8.7.0 Others Any other asset accouut balances not included in any of the aboveaccount headings.1.1.9.0.0 Intangible Assets Value of Goodwill. Trade mark/patent, Product development costand any other intangible assets

f .1.f 0.0.0 Investment Properties Total amount of investment properties after adjustment of anyadditions and disposals during the period and net of Provision forfall in value but does not include foreclosure properties.

1.1.f f .0.0 Fixed Assets (net) Sub-total of fixed assets net of depreciation.l.l.I l.l.0 Land and Buildings Cost of land, buildings and improvements or fixtures thereto usedfor banking operations.l.l.l1.2.0 Movable Property, etc. Cost of all movable property including equipment, vehicles, officemachines, depreciable software, etc.l.l.l1.3.0 Provision for depreciation Total of amounts set aside as depreciation of Fixed Assets.1.1.10.0.0 Total on Balance Sheet Assets Total of all on-balance sheet assetsOn-Balance Sheet Liabilities andEquity Capital and Reserves1.2.1.0.0 Total Deposits Sub-total of items 1.2.1.1.0 to L2.1.5.0.1.2.1.1.0 Demand deposirs Credit balances of all type of demand deposits (gross amountithout setting off debit balances).1.2.1.2.0 Savings Deposits Totals of all type of savings deposits.l.Z.l.3.O Time Deposits Term deposits, savings certificates, call deposits etc.l.Z.l .4.O Margin deposit accounts Cash advances pledged by bank's customers as security for offalance sheet credit facilities and/or loans not vet released to

customers.1.2.1.5.0 Other Deposits Any other deposit account balances not ittcluded in the aboveccount headings.1.2.2.0.0 Total Borrowings Sub-total of items 1.2.2.1.0 to 1.2.2.6.0.

| .2.2.1.0 Borrowings flom CBSL Total of all borrorvings from ol indebtedness to CBSL (Other thanREPO bollorvings).1.2.2.2.0 Borrowings from Banks and Financiat All type of borrou,in-9s frorn banks and financial institutions in Srilustitutions in Sri Lanka Lanka (Other than REPO borlowings).1.2.2.3.0 Borrowings from Banks and Finaucial All types of borrowings from foleign Banks and other Financiallnstitutions Abroad Institutions abt'oad.1.2.2.4.0 Securities sold under Repurclrase Agreements All Borrowings agairtst bank's Tt'easury bills, bonds and oLherseculities with an agreetnent to settle prior to the maturity ofunderlvins sccurities.

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Repofi - 2005( rucv )

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

Litte Code Line ltentI n structiorts

| 2'2.5.0 Subordinated Term Debt Subordinated term debt approved by the Central Bank, as eligibleto be considered for capital adequacy purposes and othersubordinated telm debt.1.2.2.6.0 Othel borrowings Any other types of borrou,ings which arc not indicated above.f .2.3.0.0 Deferred taxation Deferred tax due ro timing differ.ences.1.2.4.0.0 Current Taxation Total tax payable arnount.1.2.5.0.0 Other Liabilities Sub-total of irerns 1.2.5.1.0 ro L2.5.'1.0.1.2.5.1.0 Charges recovered in advance Any revenue received in advance, that would be appropriated overa future period of time.| .2.5 .2.0 Taxes Payable1.2.5.2.0 Accrued Interest Payable on Deposits Interest that has accrued but has not yet been credited tocustomers' LKR-denominated deposit accounts.1.2.5.3.0 Accrued Interest Payable on Borrowings Interest that has accrued but has not been paid on LKR-denominated borrowings.1.2.5-4.0 Other Accrued Expenses and Accounts Payable Provisions for utility expenses, fines, any taxes in respect ofcustomer accounts or transactions, deposits on safety lockers,excess pawning advances, advance rental deposits, EpF, ETFcontributions payable, etc.1.2.5.6.0 Suspense accounts Any unidentified differences in account balances and un reconciledaccount balances, and cheques sent for clearing but not credited torespecttve customer accounts.1.2.5.6.0 Inter branch/Head office balances "due to" (local) Net balances of several accounts such as accounts maintained athead office for claim vouchers, branch advises and othertransactions with branches and the head office.1.2.5.'7.0 Others Any other liability nor srared above.1.2.6.0.0 Total on Balance Sheet liabilities Sub-total of items 1.2.1.0.0, 1.2.2.0.0, 1.2.3.0.0, 1.2.4.0.0 and1.2.5.0.0f.3.0.0.0 Minority Interest

f .4'0'0.0 Equity Capital and Reserves Sub-total of items 1.4.1.0.0 to 1.4.3.0.01.4.1.0.0 Share Capital/Assigned Capital Voting and non-voting ordinary shares lssued and fully/partly paidand Preference shares issued and fully/partly paid or capitalassigned by the Head Office. (Figure musr agree ro roral equitycapital as stated in Starement of Changes In Equity and Reserves)1.4.2.0.0 Statutory reserve fund Statutory reserye fund creared in terms of S.20 of the BankingAct. (Figure must agree to total statutory reserve fund as stated inStatement of Changes In Equity and Reserves)1.4.3.0.0 Total Other reserves Total value of reserves other than Statutory reselve fund. (Figuremust agree to total other reserves as stated in Statement ofChanges In Equity and Reserves)1.5.0.0.0 Total On-Balance Sheet Liabilities plus Total of lines 1.2.6.0.0, 1.3.0.0.0 and 1.4.0.0.0Equity Capital and Reserves1.6.0.0.0 Off'Balancc Shcet Items Total of contingencies, commitments and contra account.1.6.1.0.0 Contingcncies Sub-total of items 1.6.f .1.0 to 1.6.1.10.01.6.1.1.0 Letters of Credit The amount of valid, unutilised amount of sieht and usance Letterof Credit operred by the bankl -6.1.2.0 Guarantees, Bonds Duty guarantees, financial guarantees, performance bonds and bidbonds issued by the bank and remaining in force as at dare.1.6.1.3.0 Shipping Cuarantees Shipping Cuarantees issued for LC Bills and non-LC Bills.1.6.1.4.0 Acceptances Import bills released to customers against drafts maturiug at a laterdate.1.6.1.5.0 Llnderwriting of Shares and Securities Bank's undertaking to buy shares, commercial papers and othersecurities if not subscribed b1, the general public1.6.1.6.0 Securitisation and Securilies Guaranteed/Endorsed Total.amount of loans and advances securitised with recourse andsecurities guaranteed or endorsed by the bank.1.6.1.7.0 Folward Contracts Foreign exchange forrvard contracts inctuding both purchase andsale agreements.

( xxvi )Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

Litte Cocle Line ltetnIttstntctiorts

1.6.1.g.0 spot contracrs Foreign exchange spot contracts including both purchase and sale

agreements.1.6.1.9.0 Derivatives Show value of all derivative contracts including futures. opiions onrnterest-rate, foreign-currency and equity related instruments.

1.6.1 .10.0 Others Any other off-balance sheet contingencies.

1.6.2.0.0 Commitments and contra accounts Sub-total of items 1.6.2.1.0 and 1.6.2.1.01.6.2.1.0 Commitments Commitments assumed by bank such as Un^drawn credit lines andany other off-balance sheet commitments.1.6.2.1.0 Contra Accounts All types of contra accounts such as bills /cheques sent forcollection, travelers' cheques on hand and any other off-balancesheet contra accounts.1.7.0.0.0 Memorandum Information1.7.1.0.0 Number of Employees Total Number of staff. (Permanent, casual etc.)1.7.2.0.0 Number of Branches Number of branches operated by the Bank.

2. Income Statement-Amounts in Rupees Thousands

2.1.0.0.0 Interest Income Sub-total of items 2.f.1.0.0 and 2.1.2.0.02.1.1.0.0 Loans and Advances Interest income received or accounted as receivable fromcustomers for different types of credit facilities-2.1.2.0.O lnterest Income on Other Interest Earning Assets lnterest income received or accounted as receivable for differenttypes of all other interest related assets.2.2.0.0.0 Interest Bxpenses Sub-total of items 2.2.1.0.0 and 2.2.2.0.02.2.1.0.0 Deposits lnierest expenditure paid or accounted as payable on all depositsproducts.Z.Z.Z.O.0 Inrerest Expense on Other lnrerest Interest expenditure paid or accounted as payable on all types ofBearing Liabilities other interest bearing liabilities.2.3.0.0.0 Net Interest Income Net position of interest income (2.1.0.0.0) and Interestexpenses (2.2.O.0.0)2.4.00.0 Non Interest Income Sub-total of items 2.4.1.0.0 and 2.4.2-0-02.4.1,0.0 Foreign Exchange Income Sub-total of Items 2.4.1,1.0 to 2,4.1,4.02.4.1.1.0 Net Gain/(Loss) on Foreign Currency Transactions Net gains or losses realised on foreign exchange trading.2.4.1.2.0 Commissions & Fees on Foreign Any commission income or fees on foreign currency transactions.

Currency Transactions2.4.1.3.0 Net gain/(loss) on FC revaluation Exchange gain or loss on revaluation of foreign currencydenominated assets and liabilities such as spot and forwardpositi ons.2.4.1.4.0 Others Any other type of Foreign Exchange income not included above.2.4.2.0.0 Other Income Sub-total of Items 2.4'2'l'0 to 2'4'2'9'0

2.4.2.1 .O Dividend income from lnvestments Dividend income received or accounted as receivable for all typesof equity investments.2.4.2.2.0 Gains on Trading/ Investment Securities Income derived by selling trading/investment securities above their

purchase price2.4.2.3.0 Capital gain on Treasury Bonds Amortized arnount of income derived by buying treasury bonds atdiscounted prices.2.4.2.4.0 Net Gain/(Loss)on Rupee Derivatives hofit recognized as income on sale of fixed assets.2.4.2.5.0 Commission on off-balance sheet credit facilities Commission received or accounted as receivable on issue of LC,LG, SG. export LC advising. guarantees and other off-balance sheetcredit facilities.2.4.2.6.0 Other Commission and Fees Any commission income for services rendered to customers or onbehalf of thild pat'ties.2.4.2.7.0 Charges on services Income carned in the form of charges on set'vices to customers2.4.2.8.0 profit on sale of Fixed Assets Profit recognized as income on sale of fixed assets.2.4.2.9.0 Others Any other- iucome not mentioned above.2.5.0.0.0 Non Interest Expenscs Sub-total of Iterns 2.5.1.0.0 to 2'5.6.0.0

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005( xxvii )

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

Litte Code Lirrc ltemInstructiotts

2.5.1.0.0 Personnel Costs All types of expenses such as salaries, reimbursements, and EpF/ETF contlibution incurred in respect of employees. excluding costof training.2.5.2.0.0 Provision for Staff Retirement Benefits Provision nradc for Staff Retirement Benefits.2.5'3.0.0 Premises. Equipment and establishment Expenses All type of e.rpenses on premises. equipment and administrativeexpen ses.2-5.4.0.0 Losses on trading /invcstment securities Any loss incurred in selling trading/investment securities below thebook value.2.5.5.0.0 Amortization of Intangible Assets Total value of amortization of intangible assets. (Goodwill/(Negative Goodwill etc.)2.5.6.0.0 Other Operating Expenses Any other operating expenditure.2.6'0.0.0 Provision for Bad and Doubtful Debts and Sub-total of Items 2.6.1.0.0 to 2.6.4.0.0Loans Written off2.6.1.0.0 Provisions - General General provision made our of profits for possible loan lossestrrespective of performance of the loans.2.6'2.0.0 Provisions - Specific Specific provision made out of profits for possible loan losses asper CBCL direction.2.6.3-0.0 Recoveries (-) Recoveries macle during the reporting period in respect of loanswritten off or provided for.2.6.4.0.0 Loans Written off Atl loans wrirren off from the credit porrfolio during rhe reportingperiod.2-7.0.0.0 Provision for decline in value Provision for potential fall in the market value of investmenrs.of investments (net)2.8.0'0'0 Operating Profit on Ordinary Activities Sub-total of total of net interest income, non interestbefore Taxes income, non interest expenses, Loan loss provisions,Provision for decline in value of investments (net).

( 2. 3. 0. 0. 0+ 2. 4.0.0.0 - 2. 5. 0. 0. 0-2. 6. 0. 0. 0 - 2. 7. 0. 0. 0 )2,9.0.0.0 Value Added Tax on Financial Services VAT on profits and others.2.10.0.0.0 Operating Profit on Ordinary Activities Operating Profit on Ordinary Activities Before Taxesbefore Corporate Tax (2.8.0.0.0) - Value Added Tax on Financial Services(2.e.0.0.0)2.11.0.0.0 Share of Subsidiaries/Associate Total share of subsidiaries/Associate Companies' Profits.Companies' Profit2.12.0.0.0 Operating Profit before Corporate Tax Sub total of item 2.f0.0.0.0 and 2.11.0.0.02.13.0.0.0 Tax on Profits on Ordinary Activities Tax payable on taxable profits.2.14,0.0.0 Operating Profits for tlre period. Operating Profit Before Corporate Tax (2.12.0.0.0) - Tax onProfits on Ordinary Activities (2.13.0.0.0).

3. Statement of Changes in Equity and Reserves-Amounts in Rupees Thousands

3.1.0.0.0 Opening Balance Closing balances of the previous finncial year.3.2.1.0.0 lssue of Share/lncrease of assigrred capital Voting and non-voting ordinary shares, preference shares issuedand fully/partly paid or increase of assigned capital by the HeadOffice during the period.3.2.2.0-0 Bonus Issue Bonus issue during the period.3.2.3.0.0 Rights lssue Rights issue during the period.3.2.4.0.0 Surplus on revaluation of property Amounts recognized over cost on revaluation of fixed assets duringthe period.3.2.5.0.0 Net profit/Loss for the period Profit or loss for the reporting period.3.2.6.0.0 Transfer lo reserves during the;reriod Statutory and other transfers made to respective reserve accountsduring the period.3.2.7.0.0 Dividend Paid for the year (YYYY) Distribution of Profit after tax among shareholders.3.2.8.0.0 Profits Transfer to Head office Applicable only for foreign banks.3.2.90.0 Othcrs Shorv an1, orher items u,hich are directly impacted on equity andreserves. Indicate these items separately,3.3.0'0.0 Closin-e Balance Closing balances as at reportirrg period.

( xxviii )Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005

Part lllMajor nOministrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

Lirrc Corle Lirte ltentIrt st ructiotts

4. Selected Performance Indicators

4.1.0.0.0 Regulator5' Capital Adequacy4.1.1.0.0 Core Capital (Tier l) Indicate the aggregate arnount of core capital as per capital

adequacy requirement.(lndicate the amounts on bank only basis(solo) and group basis separately)4.I.Z.O.O Total Capital Base Indicate the aggregate amounts of total capital base as per capital

adequacy requirement.(lndicate the amounts on bank only basis(solo) and group separately)4.1.3.0.0 Core Capital Ratio (Tier l),%' Tier I Capital *100

Risk-Weighted AssetsAs per capital adequacy Dilection.(lndicate the ratios on bankonly basis (solo) and group basis separately)4.1.4.0.0 Total Capital Adequacy Ratio, 7r, Total Capital Base *100

Risk-Weighted AssetsAs per capital adequacy Direction (lndicate the ratios on bankonly basis (solo) and group basis separately)4.2.0,0.0 Assets Quality (Quatity of Loan Portfolio)4.2.1.0.0 Gross Non - Performing Advances Ratio, 7oSuspenseXTotal Gross Loans & Advances - Total Interest in

Suspense) (Bank only)4.2.2.0.0 Net Non - Performing Advances Ratio, VoSuspense-Total ProvisionsXTotal Gross Loans & Advances -Total Interest ln Suspense) (Bank Only)4.3.0.0.0 Profitability4.3.1.0.0 Interest Margin,Vo Net Interest lncome (annualised) *100

Average Value of Total Assets

Net Interest Income: Interest Income less Interest expenses(annualised). Average Value of Total Assets: Monthly average forthe reporting date.(Bank only)4.3.2.0.0 Return on Assets (Before Tax),V<t Profits After Tax (annualised) *100

Average Value of Total Assets

Net operating profit on ordinary activities after tax(annualised).Average Value of Total Assets: Monthly average forthe reporting date.(Bank only)4.3.3.0.0 Return on Equity,To Profits After xl00

Average Value of Capital FundsNet operating profit on ordinary activities after tax(annualised).Average Value of Capital Funds: Monthly averagefor the reporting date.(Bank only)4.4.0.0.0 Regulatory Liquidity4.4.1.0.0 Statutory Liquid Assets lndicate the aggregate amount of average liquid assets as perstatutory liquid assets requirement. (For LCBs: Indicate the

amounts on the basis of Domestic banking Unit (DBU) and Off-shore Banking Unit (OSBU) separately as per Statutory LiquidAssets requirement)4.4.2.0.0 Sraturorv Liquid Assers Ratio,%, For LCBs: Average Liquid Assets/Liabilities Base *100

Indicate the ratio on the basis of Domestic banking Unit(DBU) and Off-shore Banking Unit (OSBU) separately as perStatutory Liquid Assets requirement.For LSBs: Average Liquid Assets/Total Deposits +100

As per Statutot'y Liquid Assets requirement.

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005( xxix )

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2o0s

Bank Supervision Departrnentl0 October 2005To: AII Licensed Specialised Bank(except National Savings Bank)

Dear Sir,

As announced at the meeting of the CEOs of Licensed Commercial Banks (LCBs) and Licensed SpecialisedBanks (LSBs) held on 28 July 2005, the Direction no.3 of 2005 on the Sin-ele Borrower Limit has been amendedto be in line with the new Direction issued to LCBs in tlris regard.

Please find enclosed the revised Direction no.5 of 2005 issued under Section 761(l) of the Banking Act.Please acknowled-ee receipt.Yours faithfully,Sgd. Director of Bank Supervision

Direction issued by the Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka under Section l6J(l) of theBanking Act, No. 30 of 1988 as amended by the Banking (Amendrnent) Act No. 33 of 1995 and Banking(Amendment) Act No. 2 of 2005.

Sgd. Sunil MendisGovernorColombol0 October 2005

DIRECTION NO. 5 OF 2OO5L The Banking Act (Single Borrower Limit) Directions No. 3 of 2005 is hereby amended as follows.2. Para-eraph 2 of the said Directions is repealed and replaced with the following:A licensed specialised bank lraving an equity capital as defined in the Banking Act shall not grauraccommodation exceeding thirty per cent (30Vo) of the capital funds of such bank as at the end of itspreceding financial year:2.I to any single company, public corporation, firm, association of persons or an2.2 in the ag_qregate tor2.2.1 an individual, his close relations or to a company or firm in which

r ntere s t;2.2.2 a company and one or more of the followin-e2.2.2.1 its subsidiaries;2.2.2.2 irs holdin_q cornpany;2.2.2.3 its associate company;2.2-2.4 a subsidiary of its holdin_e company; or2.2.2.5 a company in which such company or its subsidiary, or its holding company,or a subsidiary of its holdin-e company has a substantial interest3. Paragraph 4 of the said Directions is repealed and replaced witlr the following:"4. For purposes of para-eraphs 2 and 3, in determinin-e whether accommodation exceeds 3OVo of thecapital funds or I5Vo of the capital fuuds of a licensed specialised bank, the existing facility lirnitsor the outstandin,q amounts of all accommodatiorr, whichever is more shall be taken into account.For purposes of para-uraph 3, the total accornrnodation of a licensed specialised bank as at tlre endof the precedin-e financial year shall nlean the outstarrding amount of atl accommodation as at theend of the preceding financial year."

individual;

he has a substantial

(locr)Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - zOOs

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

(c) The a,egregate of all accommodation excluded on the aboveof the capital funds of the bank.

8OVo

50Vo

basis shall not exceed 100 per cent

(d) The bank concerned shall be sarisfied that the credit rating assigned to the bank providing the

_quaranree is current and has not fallen due for review, and that the Director of Bank Supervisionshall be notified of any change with imrnediate effect and the accommodation granted should berevised accordingly at the earliest credit review.

Para-eraph 6.4 of the said Directions shall be repealed and replaced with the following:"(iv) to a customer/customers to whom accomrnodation is to be -eranted for the use of fundsdirectly in an infrastructure development project provided that,5.1 the infrastructure development project is a project as described in Annex I hereto;5.2 the customer/customers has/have been awarded a contract to directly engage in aninfrastructure development project;5.3 suclr project is funded to the extent of at least fifty per cent (507o) by sources outside Sri Lankaor by a consortium of licensed commercial banks and/or license specialised banks excluding thebank granting the accommodation; and5.4 such licensed commercial bank has certified to the Director of Bank Supervision of the CentralBank of Sri Lanka prior to the disbursement of the accommodation that it has satisfied itself that

the conditions (a), (b) and (c) above stipulated herein have been met'5.5 Lending for ilfrastructure projects in terms of this sub para-eraph shall not exceed fifty per cent

(50Vo) of ttr. capital funds of the bank as at the end of the preceding financial year."

These Directions will be effective with irnmediate effect.

4. Paragraph 5 of the said Directiorrs is repealed and replaced with the following:"5.(l) Accommodation _eranted against the security of the following items to customers belonging tothe categories referred to at para-eraph 2.1 or para-eraph 2.2 shall be excluded from thecornputation of the Single Borrower Limit:a. Cash;b. Government/Central Bank Securities;c. Treasury/Central Bank Guarantees;d. Guarantees issued by the Asian Developrnent Bank, International Development Association

and the World Bank or other Institutions acceptable to the Central Bank of Sri Lanka.e. Subject to rhe terms and conditions stipulated in subparagraphs (2) below, accommodation

_eranted against the security of a guarantee or similar instrument, as determined to be acceptableby the Diiector of Bank Supervision issued by a bank which is incorporated outside Sri Lanka ora Licensed Commercial Bank incorporated in Sri Lanka or a Licensed Specialised Bankincorporated in Sri Lanka;(Z) A _euaranree or sirnilar instrument issued by an institution listed under subparagraph (e) above

shall be acceptable subject to the following terms and conditions:(a) The institution shall be a highly rated institution with a credit ratin-e of A- and above (orequivalent), rated by a credit rating agency acceptable to the Monetary Board of the CentralBank of Sri Lanka.(b) The percenrage of the value of accommodation that may be excluded from the computation of thesingle borrower lirnit shall be as follows:

7o of principal value exemptedCredit ratins

AAA to AA- (or equivalent)A+ to A- (or equivalent)

5.

6.

Central Bank ol Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005( xxxi )

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

Annex IThe definition of infrastructure lending that would qualify for exemption under paragraph6.4 of the Direction on Single Borrower LimitAccommodation extended by banks to an infrastructure facility as specified below will qualify forexemption from the Single Borrower Lirnit under Section 6.4 of the Direction, A credit facility provided toa company en_ea_eed in:o Developing oro Operatin-e and maintainin_e oro Developin-e, operatin-e, up-eradin-e and maintaining any infrastructure facility that is a project ip any ofthe following sectors, or any infrastructure facility of a sirnilar nature :i. a road, including toll road, a bridge or a rail systern;ii. a hi,ehway project includin-e other activities being an inte-qral part of the hi-ehrvay project;iii. a port, airport, inland waterway or inland port;iv. a water supply project, irrigation project, water treatment system, sanitation and sewera,eesystem or solid waste mana_qement system;v. telecommunication services whether basic or cellular, including radio pa-eing, network oftrunking, broadband network and internet services;vi. an industrial park or special economic zone;vii. generation or generation and distribution of powerviii' transmission or distribution of power by laying a network of new transmission or disribution lines.ix. construction relating to projects involving agro-processing and supply of inputs to a-ericulture;x. construction of educational institutions and hospitalsxi. any other infrastructure facility of similar nature

Bank Supervision Department27 October 2005To: The CEOs of all Licensed Commercial Banksand Licensed Specialised Banks

Dear Sir,

SINGLE BORROWER LIMIT

Single Borrower Limit (SBL) Direction No. 4 of 2005 (for Licensed Cornmercial Banks) and Direction No. 5of 2005 (for Licensed Specialised Banks) pennit the banks to exceed the SBL against guaranrees from hi*ehlyrated banks or the head office of the foreign banks operating in Sri Lanka based on rhe credit ratilg oittrlbank issuing the guarantee.As announced at the CEOs' meetin-e held at the Cerrtral Bank of Sri Lanka on 20 October 2005, it lrasbeen decided to postpone the implementation of the limit on the bank guarantee/undertakin,q till 01.01 .2007in view of representations made by the banks with re-eard to difficulties faced by thern.Accordin-ely, the banks will be pennitted to exceed the SBL a-eainst a bank ,quarantee or a _quarantee/undertakingindemnity froln the head office up to the full value of such -quarantee till 01.01.2007, with immediite effect,

Yours faithfully,Sgd. Director of Bank Supervision

( xxxii )Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2OOs

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

Circular No. : 35/0U00510006109Domestic Operations Departrnent28 April, 2005.To: All Licensed Contntercial Banks andPrintarv Dealers

Furtlrer to my Circular No. 35/01/0051006105 dated 27'h January 2004, conveying the above OperatingInstructions.Participatin-e Institutions ( PI ) are hereby inforrned that, notwithstandin-s the provisions contained inthe aforesaid Operatin-e Instructions on provision of additional drawdowns of ILF during the Business Day atthree desi_enated times, ILF would be provided on the same terms and conditions, at the request of a PI, oncase by case basis, even in between the designated times to meet any urgent intra-day liquidityrequirements of a PI.Accordingly clause 8 of the aforesaid circular is hereby amended by the insertion of tlre followingparagraph immediately after the existing clause 8 :-Provided, however, that notwithstandin-e anything contained herein or in clause 10, the Central Bankmay, at its discretion, at the request of a PI, perrnit additional drawdowns of ILF even in between suchdesi-enated times to meet any ur-qent intra-day liquidity requirements of a PI.

DirectorDomestic Operations Department.

Ref: 0610410112005Exchan-ee Control Department1410212005Operating Instructions to All Authorised DealersAnd National Savings Bank

Dear Sirs.OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS TO AUTHORISED DEALERS

Afl Authorised Dealers are hereby informed that with effect from 15102/2005 all remittances received fromforeign persons and entities including forei-en governments to the Non Governmental Organisations (NGOs)operatin_e in Sri Lanka should be channelled through a Special Account titled "Post Tsunami InwardRemittances Account" (PTIRA) subject to the followin-e terms and conditions:l) The account should be maintained only in Sri Lanka (SL) Rupees.2) When openin-e tlre account Authorised Dealer should exercise his due diligence to satisfy the bonafides of the NGO and credential of si-enatories to the account of the NGO, in terms of Know YourCustomer (KYC) *euidelines.3) Credits to the account should be restricted only to SL Rupee proceeds realised out of inwardremittances received in convertible forei-en currencies from foreign persons, entities and -eovernmentsetc. and interest accrued to the account.4) Debits to the account should be perrnitted freely for any local disbursement.5) There sl'routd be no restriction to open and maintain more than one account if any NGO intends to openmore tlran one account with different banks and with different branches of a bank dependin-e upon itslocality of operation and the project requirement.6) Monthly statements in respect of all such accounts opened by Authorised Dealers, indicatin-e debitsald credits rnade to tlre account should be forwarded to tlre Exchan-ee Control Departnrent on or before

7'h day of the following month.Controller of Exchansecc: SG,DG(W), DG(J). AC(D). AG(K), AG(W), AG(F)AG(J). AG(C). DBS. DIOT)

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Reporl - 2005( xxxiii )

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

Ref. 0610410212005

Operating Instructions to Authorised DealersDear Sirs.

It has been decided by the Central Bank to introduce as an added incentive to the exporters, a Forei_enCurrency Account Scheme titled "Indirect Exporters' Foreign Currency Accounts (IEFCA)" to allow indirectexporters to receive payments in foreign currency from direct exporters who are in a position to make paymentin foreign currency, for their supplies subject to the following terms and conditiorrs:(i) IEFCAs should be opened and rnaintained in respect of an indirect exporter only in a DomesticBankin-e Unit of an Authorised Dealer.(ii) The facility of receiving forei,en currency to the credit of an IEFCA from a direct exporter for theproducts supplied by an indirect exporter should be available only to those indirect exporters whoseproducts contain at least 35Vo of domestic value addition. The Authorised Dealers should obtain acertificate issued by the Sri Lanka Export Developrnent Board (EDB) or tlre Board of Investments ofSri Lanka (BOI) to the indirect exporter, confirmin-q that the domestic value addition of his supplies tothe direct exporter is 35Vo or more of the value of the products. Such certificates will be issued by theEDB in respect of non BOI enterprises and BOI in respect of BOI enterprises after careful assessmentof the value added component of the products.Debits to an IEFCA should be restricted only to the payments to be made in forei-en exchange by anindirect exporter for his imported input requirements and for direct conversions into Sri Lanka Rupees.Foreign currency such as notes and TCs slrould not be issued a-eainst an IEFCA.The balance carried forward in each IEFCA at the end of each month should not exceed US$ 5,000and all excess monies held in the account at the end of the month over US$ 5,000 should be convertedinto Sri Lanka Rupees. The Authorised Dealer should obtain a written consent from the indirectexporter to that effect at the time of openin-e of the account.(vi) Once an indirect exponer ceases his business, Authorised Dealer should withdraw the facility granted tohim by convertin-s the entire balance in the account into Rupees within 60 days from the cessation of hisbusiness as an indirect exporter. The EDB and the BOI are expected to review the status of indirectexporters with respect to the value added component of their product at least once a year.(vii) Quarterly statement indicating the a-egregated debits and credits to all IEFCAs should be forwarded tothe Exchan-ee Control Department, addressed to Branch "D" before the expiry of the l5'r' day of thefollowing quarter.For the purpose of these Operatin,e Instructior.rs, indirect exporters are defined as "any person or entitymanufacturin-e/processin-e/sub-contractin-e/ or supplying a product in the final form directly to an exporter".

Yours faithfully,Controller of Exchanse

Copies - G, DGG, AGG Director General/EDB, Director General/BOlD/Bank Supervision Dept., D/International Operations Dept.,All Authorised Dealers

(iii)

(iv)(v)

Department of Excharrge Control2005-04-08

Exchange Control Department09 May 2005

Ref:06/04 10312005

Operating Irtstuctiotrs toand tlte Natiotml SavirgsDear Sirs,POST TSUNAMI INWARD REMITTANCES ACCOUNT (PTIRA)

Your attention is drawrr to tlre itenr (2) of attaclred Operatin_e Irrstructions Ncl.06/04/0112005 dated14.02.2005, you are hereby requested to rely on the followirrg documentary evidence in exercising due

Autltorised Deale rsBattk

( xxxiv )Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2OOs

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

dili-eence to identify the bona-fide of a NGO at tlre time of openin-e an accour.rt for tlre NGO and permittingtransactions to be continued throu-eh the account.(i) The certificate of registration -eranted by the "National Secretariat for NGOs" under the VoluntarySocial Service Or,eanisations (Registration and Supervision) Act No.3l of 1980; or(ii) In the absence of above (i), the recommerrdation made by the "Centre for Non Governmental Sector"(CNGS) of the Ministry of Finance for re-eistlation of the NGO.You are also hereby requested to send to Ine on or before 28 May 2005, tlre names and addresses ofNGOs rnaintaining bank accounts with you witlrout subrnission of the above evidence.

Yours faithfully,Controller of ExchaneeEncl.cc: G, DGG, AGG, DBS, DER, D/IO

Ref.06/0510412005Department of Exchan-{e Control,24.06.2005.Operating Ittstructiotrs toAll Authorised Dealers

Dear Sirs,

AMENDMENTS OF SPECIAL IMPORT LICENCE REGULATIONS

This is to inform you that the limit of advance payment stipulated for irnports in the Regulation 2(i)(d),published in the Government Gazette (Extraordinary) No.t02216 of 8'h April 1998 has now been enhancedupto US$ 10,000/= in terms of a re-eulation made by the Hon. Minister of Trade, Commerce and ColtsumerAffairs and published in the attached Government Gazette (Extraordinary) No.l393121* of 20'h May 2005.

Yours faithfully,Controller of Exchan-eec.c.: Governor DGG, AGG D/ER D/BS, D/IOD* - Gazette Notification was published by the Horr'ble Minister of Trade, Commerce and Consumer Affairs.

Ref. No. 0610810612005Exchange Control Department23t09t2005

Operating Irtstructiotts to Autltorised DealersMONITORING SCHEME ON FOREIGN EXCHANGE DRAWINGS AGAINSTINTERNATIONAL ELECTRONIC CREDIT. DEBIT OR ANY OTHER FUNDTRANSFER CARDSIt has been brou-eht to our notice that with the rapid expansion of the use of Electlonic Fund Transfer Cards(EFTCs) with -slobal access, reported instances of abuse of suclr cards for making paylnertts in forei-enexchange have si-enificantly increased irr the recent past. Therefore, in order to prevent suclt abuses in tlrefuture, it has been decided to streu-sthen the existing rnonitorirrg scherne introduced in tertns of ouroperatirr-e instructions issued under Ref. No. EC/09199(D) dated l999lI2lIl and Ref. No. EC/02/200O(D)

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005( xxxr, ;

Pafi lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

dated 2000/02/03. Accordingly, the Notice at Aunex I grantin-e permission to make payments in forei-enexchan-ee on an EFTC subject to certaiu tenns arrd conditions has been published in the ExtlaordinaryGazette No: I4lIl5 of l9'r' Septernber 2005.Ll It is irnportant that Authorised Dealers make available the said notice to custolners for perusalwhen issuin-e EFTCs and that the custorner's confirmation of havin-e perused the said notice beobtained irr the custorner's undertaking illustrated in Annex I I and this undertakins beincorporated in the a_qreerxent that you enter into with cardholder.1.2 Irt the case of existin-s EFTC holders authorised dealers should make arran-qetnellts to ensurethat all possible attempts have been made to infonn the requirements of the -eeneral perrnission

-eranted in the aforesaid gazette notification to the existing cardholders.1.3 Authorised Dealers should also include a condition in the customer's undertaking that ifreasonable -erounds exist to suspect that unauthorised forei-en exchan-ee transactiolls are beingcarried out on an EFTC the Authorised Dealer retains the ri-eht to irnmediately suspendavailability of foreign exchan-9e on the EFTC and to report the tnatter to the Controller ofExchan-ee. Authorised Dealers should also retain the ri-qht to obtain information on transactionscarried out by a cardholder in forei-en exchan-qe on an EFTC.2. EFTCs slrould be issued to residents in Sri Lanka.2.1 EFTCs could however, be issued to holders of NRFC, RNNFC, RFC accounts of DolnesticBankin-e Unit and Off Shore accounts in the Off Shore Bankin_e Unit irrespective of theirresidential status provided that the expenditure incurred on an EFTC will be debited only to anaforesaid account. In cases where foreign currency funds lying to the credit of suclr an accountare not adequate to make the debits, no debits should be made to a Rupee Account of thecardholder without rny permission, All EFTC holders must be made aware of this requirement.2.2 The issue of EFTCs should also be subject to a condition that if the cardholder leaves Sri Lankaeitlrer for good or for employment or permanent residence abroad, the card issued to him/hershould be surrendered to the Authorised Dealer unless such card was issued for makin-gsettlement for forei,en exchan-ee drawin-qs on an EFTC out of funds lying to the credit of a NRFC,RFC. RNNFC accourlt and an Off Shore account.3. All Authorised Dealers should strictly rnonitor accounts used by EFTC holders for makin-e payments inforeign exchange and exercise due dili-eence to prevent the unauthorised transactions. If there arereasonable -erounds to suspect that any cardholder incurs expenditure in foreign exchan-ee for anyunauthorised transactions, action should be taken irnrnediately to suspend foreign exchan-ee paymenton his/her EFTC and brin-e the matter to the notice of tlre Controller of Exchan.qe.4. Periodic Statements to Exclran_ee Control Department4.1 Authorised Dealer should be able to identify each cardholder's expenditure incurred in forei-enexchan-ee separately,4.2 A rnontlrly detailed report in the fonnat of Annex III, containing information on cardholderswho have incurred expenditure in foreign exchange, inclusive of cash drawin_es in foreigncurrency exceedin-e US$ 5,000 or its equivalent in any other foreign currency, in any onemonth and who have incurred expenditure for a single trausaction exceeding US$ 3000/-should be forwarded to the "Investigation Unit"', Exchange Control Department, CentralBank of Sri Lanka, Colombo 01 not later than the 7th day of the following month after emailingthese information to eftc@cbsl.lk .4.3 Operating instructions previously issuedRef. No. EC/02120O0(D) dated 2000102103

CC: DGGAGGConsultantsSG

Controller of Exchanee

under Ref. No. EC/O9/99(D) dated 1999/Lzl11 andon the above subject are hereby rescinded.

( xxxvi )Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

The Gazette of the Democratic socialist Republic of sri Lanka

Annex 1

EXTRAORDINARYNo. 1411/5- Monduy, September L9, 2005PART 1: SECTION (1) - GENERALCentral Bank of Sri Lanka NoticesNOTTCE UNDER EXCHANGE CONTROL ACT (CHAPTER 423 OF TrrB CLE)Permission in terms of Section 7 and Section 8 of the Exchange Control Act(Chapter 423 of the CLE)

l. Pennission is hereby granted for the purpose of Section 7 and 8 of the Exchan,ee Control Act(Chapter423 of the CLE) for a person in or resident in Sri Lanka to make payments in foreign exchange to aperson resident outside Sri Lanka on his Electronic Fund Transfer Card (EFTC) subject to the followingterms and conditions.2. (a) A Payment on an EFTC to a person or an entity resident outside Sri Lanka may be made only for thefollowing purposes:D Payment to be made abroad by a cardholder for services of a personal nature including travel,accommodation, medical, living and educational expenses.ii) Payment for purchase of goods abroad for personal useiii) Payment for irnport of goods into Sri Lanka for personal use subject to a limit of US$ 3,000 (c.i. f) or its equivalent in any other foreign currency per consignment.iv) Payment of registration fees, examination fees and annual subscription fees of a personalnature payable to a foreign professional body or academic institution.v) Payment to be made in respect of insurance premium only for travel and health insurance ofpersonal nature.(b) Any payrnent in foreign currency on an EFTC for any transaction which falls outside the purviewof paragraph 2(a) shall require the prior written permission of the Controller of Exchange, unlesssuch payment is in respect of a permitted transaction made out of the funds lying to the credit ofa Non Resident Foreign Currency Account (NRFC), a Resident Foreign Currency Account (RFC),a Resident Non National Forei-sn Currency Account (RNNFC) or an Off Shore account in an OffShore Banking Unit of a licensed commercial bank.3. For the purpose of this Gazette notification, unless the context otherwise requires;'Electronic Funds Transfer Card (EFTC)' means a card or device that enables the user to transfervalue in credit, debit or any other form and includes credit cards, debit cards and stored value cards.And,'Personal use' means for the use of the holder of the card, his spouse and children and parents anddoes not include use for any commercial purpose.

H A G HETTIARACHCHIController of ExchangeColombo19 September 2005

Annex 11

(To be included in the EFTC application or EFTC a-qreement that the cardholders enter/s into with the barrk.)

CENTRAL BANK OF SRI LANKADeclaration by the Applicant/s for Electronic Fund Transfer CardsTo: The Controllet' of Exchange(To be filled by the Applicant/s to obtain foreign exchan-ee against Credit/Debit or any other Electronic FundTransfer Card.)

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Repon - 2005( xxxvii )

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

Supplementary Cardholder) declare that all details -eiven above by rne/us on this forrn are true aud correct.VWe hereby confirrn that VWe arn/are aware of the conditions imposed under the Exchan-ee Control Act inthe Notice published in the Extraordinary Gazette No: l4lll1 of 19'h September 2005 subject to which tlre cardmay be used for transactions in forei-en exchange and VWe lrereby undertake to abide by the said conditions.VWe further a-eree to provide any inforrnation on transactions carried out by rne/us in folei-en exchan_ee onthe card issued to me/us as..... ..... bank may require for the purpose of Exchange Control Act.I/We also affirm tl'rat I/We undertake to surrender the Credit Card/s tobank, if I/We migrate or leave Sri Lanka for employment abroad.I/We amlare aware that the Authorised Dealer is required to suspend availability of foreign exchangeon EFTC if reasonable,eround exist to suspect that unauthorized forei-en exchan-qe transactions are bein-ecarried out on the EFTC issued to me/us.

DD.MM.YY Sisnature of the Basic Cardholder

Signature of the Supplementary Cardholder

I, as the Authorized Officer have carefully examined the information together with relevant documentsgiven by the applicant/s and satisfied with the bona-fide of these information and documents. I undertake toexercise due diligence on the transactions carried out by the cardholder on his/her EFTC in foreign exchan-9eand to suspend the availability of foreign exchange on the EFTC if reasonable grounds exist to suspect thatunauthorised forei-en exchange transactions are being carried out on the EFTC in violation of theundertaking and to bring the matter to the notice of the Controller of Exchange.

DD.MM.YY Sienature of the Authorized Officer

Annex IIITo: Corttroller of Exchange (Attention: Investigation Divisiort)Exchange Control DepartmentCentral Bank of Sri InnkaColontbo I

Central Bank of Sri LankaThe Monthly Report in respect of accounts who have incurred cumulative expenditure in foreign currencyexceeding US$ 5000 and an expenditure over US$ 3000 for a single transaction during the month of... ... .....of the year in compliance with the Paragraph (4.2) of the Operating InstructionsRef. No. 06/08106/2005 of 2005109123 issued in terms of4 of 1953

Part A - Details of Card holders who have utilized foreign exchange in excess of US$ 5000 per month and inexcess of US$ 3000 per transaction

;';;;;,;;; ;; ;;;. orricer authorised by the bankStarnp of the Bank/Authorised DealerDate:

M M/DD/YY

Name of theCard holder& Address (inblock letters)

N.I.C.No.PassportNo.CardNo.Amountpaid to theMerchant inforeigncurrency

Name of theMerchant/MerchantCategoryCode

The country inwhichtransactiontaken place

Whether thepa1'rnent isthroughIntcrnet

( xxxviii )Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 20Os

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

The total expenditure incurred by all EFTC holders in foreign currency for the Month ........of theyear ..

fotal No. of Cards issued forthe ntonthTypes of CardsTotal Value of foreign exchange expenditure incurredby all EFT Card holders in US$

Signature of the officer authorised by the bankStamp of the Bank/Authorised DealerDate: ffi;;;;

International Operations Departrnent2l December 2005To: AII Autlrcriz.ed DealersDear Sir,DIRECTIONS ON FINANCIAL DERIVATIVE PRODUCTS

Further to our letter dated l2'h Au-eust 2005 enclosirrg the Directions on Financial Derivative Products.Attached herewith is a revised version of the above, which will be effective as from I't January 2006.

Please acknowled-ee receipt.Thank you.Yours faithfully,Mrs. P LiyanageDirector of International Operations

Ref : 331011002/008610022l December 2005

To : AII Authoriz.ed Dealers

DIRECTIONS ON FINANCIAL DERIVATIVE PRODUCTS (REVISED)

This circular revises and supersedes our circular on Directions on Financial Derivative Products dated lz'hAugust 2005. The revised directions will be effective as from lst January 2006, and will be in forceregarding all rnatters relating to the derivative transactions in forei-en exchange (not involving LKR) thatare permitted by CBSL for comrnercial banks appointed to act as Authorrzed Foreign Exclrange Dealers.These directions shall be read together witlr the explanatory note to the directiotts annexed herewith.l. Permitted ProductsDerivative transactions perrnitted under these direction include:l.L Interest Rate Swaps (IRS)1.2 Interest Rate Options (IRO)L.3 Forward Rate Agreements (FRA)1.4 Cross Currency Swaps (CCS)1.5 Currency/Cornrnodity Options (CCO)2. The above products can be used only in respect of transactions of current nature and in the case ofcapital transactiot'ts, those perrnitted in terms of current exchan-ee control re-eulatiotrsr.

I Exclrange Control Department circular Nos. EC/06/94.BC/D/GL|1994/2 dated 18.03.1994

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005( xv,xix )

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

3. Purpose of Permitted Derivative ProductsPerrnitted derivative products shall only be used for the purpose of hed-ein_e the risks arisin_e from itsown assets or liabilities or for altering its risk profile but not for speculative purposes. Only theAuthorised Dealers are allowed to maintain open exposures and such exposures shall be subject to tl'reexposure position lirnits specified by the Central Bank of Sri Lanka (CBSL). Authorized Dealers who arequalified under 4.1 of these directions and those wlro wislr to el'r-qa-ee in derivative transactions shall informtlre International Operations Department of the CBSL, their interest to enga-se ilr derivative transactions.Tlrese transactiorrs will be subject to the supervision and scrutiny of the CBSL.4. Eligibility and Permissible Activity4.1. The commercial banks that have a capital adequacy ratio of more tlran IlVo be perrnitted toenga-qe in derivative transactions.4.2. Authorized Dealer shall ensure that each IRS/IRO/FRA/CCS/CCO is made only in respect of apermitted underlying transaction or capital/current exposure.4.3. Authorized Dealers shall ensure that each option, currency swap is made only in respect of aunderlying current transaction such as payment and receipt in forei-en exchange in respect ofgoods and services on trade, perrnitted capital transaction such as investment and forei-encurrency loans2 and permitted foreign currency deposits3.4.4- Importers are allowed to enter into derivative transactions to hed-ee their exposure arisin_e out ofunderlyin-e ftansactions relative to goods and services in trade or genuiue balance sheet exposures.4.5. Under any circumstances, IRS, IRO, FRA, CCS and CCO slrall not be perrnitted throu-elr a bankabroad or a correspondent foreign bank to its custorners in Sri Lanka in respect of any foreigncurrency deposit permitted to retain abroad.4.6. In the case of permitted forei-en currency loans, the notional principal amount of the IRS/IRO/FRA/CCS/CCO shall not exceed the outstandin-e amount of tlre foreign currency loan or tlrebalance of the foreign currency deposit of the pennitted persons/institutions.4.1. Authorized Dealers can use the product for the purpose of hed-eing tradin-e books and balancesheet exposure.4.8. The currency of the hedge is left to the choice of the customer.4.9. The notional principal amount of the CCO and CCS shall not exceed the outstanding forei-encurrency obligations.4.10. Authorized Dealers shall offer option contracts only irr respect of a transaction, which normallyqualifies for forward foreign exchange contract and to hedge such risks arising out of genuinebalance sheet exposures.4.11. The Authorized Dealers shall take steps to hedge their risk exposure with their correspondentoverseas banks or any other domestic bank.4.12- Authorized Dealers are permitted to run open positions within the lirnits specified by themana-qement of respective banks and approved by the CBSL.4.13. The parties involved are free to use any Benchmark rate on mutual a-qreement.4.14. All the conditions applicable for rolling over, cancellation and rebookin-e of forward contractswould be applicable to option contracts as well.5. Eligible Foreign CurrenciesTransactions relatin-e to tlre perrnitted derivative products are lirnited to the followin-e currencies. -USD, GBP, EUR, JPY, CAD, AUD and CHF.6. TenorThe rnaturity period of a derivative instrument shall not exceed ten (10) years or the rernaining life ofthe underlying transactions, whichever is less.7. Risk ManagementThe Authorized Dealers shall be required to ensure that adequate measures are taken to miti-sate creditrisk, market risk and operational risk and also its cornpliance with the provisions of the rninirnum capitaladequacy requirements permittin-e to derivative transactrons.I Authorized Dealers are permitted to lend in forei-en currency <lnly to direct exporters. indirect exporters. enterprisesapproved by Board of Investment (BOl). enterprises u,ith full excmption tl-onr tlre Exchan-ee Control Act (ECA) and anyother pafty approved by the ConLroller of Exchan-ee (CE) for a specific plrrpose.3 Foreign currency deposits are pcrmitted to exporters. BOI companies, exempted fronr Exchange Control Law and anyother party approved by the CE.

( xl)Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

8. Reporting8.1. Authorized Dealers are required to report to the International Operations Department of theCBSL on a monthly basis the tralrsactious undertaken within the month indicating producttype, alnounts, rates, rnaturities, currency, details of counterparty and details of underlyin-etransactions/exposure etc.8.2. Bank must make adequate disclosures in their Audited Annual Accounts with re_sard to thederivative transactions that they have undertaken during the financial year under review at leastto the extent required in the Sri Lanka Accountirrg Standards (SLAS) or Intenrational FinancialReportin-e Standards (IFRS).9. Accounting Treatment and ValuationAccepted accounting standards and mark to market valuation shall be done on a daily basis.

10. DocumentationThe bank shall ensure the use of the International Swap Dealers Association (ISDA) agreement with thecounterparty for the interest of both parties.I l. Miscellaneous Requirementsll.l. Authorized Dealers shall obtain an undertakin_e from customers interested in using thederivative products that they have clearly understood the nature of the products and theirinherent risks.

11.2. Authorized Dealers shall provide adequate information on the fransaction especially with re-eard to theconditions and clauses to be incorporated into the product-deterrnined benchmark interest rate, strikeprice, premia if any and risks involved to their customers and ensure highest level of transparency.

Mrs. P LiyanageDirector of International OperationsH. A. G. HettiarachchiController of Exchanee

Annex

EXPLANATORY NOTES ON SOME OF THE SECTIONS OF DIRECTIONS ONFINANCIAL DERIVATIVE PRODUCTS

These explanatory notes form part of the directions on Financial Derivative Transactions and shall be readto*eether with the Directions.l. Financial Derivatives"Derivative contract under reference means" a financial contract of which the value is determined byreference to one or more underlyin-q assets or indices. Derivative transactions permitted under thesedirections are Interest Rate Swaps (IRS), Interest Rate Options (IRO), Forward Rate Agreements (FRA),Cross Currency Swaps (CCS), Currency/Comrnodity Options (CCO) such as gold and otlrer precious/industrial metals options.2, Authorized Dealers

Tlrese directions include both Dornestic Bankin-e Units (DBUs) and Forei-en Currency Banking Units (FCBUs)of commercial banks. Only the commercial banks authorized to act as authorized dealers under tlre ExchangeControl Act are pennitted to enga-se in DMM transaction specified in section 4(c) of this explanation.When conducting Derivative Transactions, Authorized Dealers shall comply with all relevantre-eulations, such as forei,err exchan-ee re-eulations and other re-gulations issued, from time to time, by theCentral Bank of Sri Lanka.3. Permitted Products(a) Interest Rate Swap is an a-qreelnent between two parties to exchatrge a strealn of interestpayments based upon a specified notional principal amount on multiple occasions during aspecified term. The cash payments are based on fixed/floating or floating/fixed rates areexchan-ee by the parties from one another. In either case, there is no exchan-ee of principal-(b) Forrvard Rate Agreement is an interest rate contract between two parties that allows an entity toposition itself in tlre interest rate market. The parties enter into a contract at a rate for a notiollalprincipal amount. On the settlement date, tlre transactions are rtet settled a-eainst a pre-determined benchrnark or reference rate.

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005(xli)

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

(c) Cross Currency Swaps: Cross currency swap is an a-qreernent between two parties to exchangeinterest payments denominated in two different currencies for a specified term. One interestpayment is typically calculated using a floating rate index such as USD LIBOR. The otherinterest payment is based upor.r a fixed rate or another floatin-e rate index denorninated in adifferent currency. Unlike a sin-qle currency swap, a Cross Currency swap sometirnes (but notalways) involves an exchan-ee of principal. The initial principal exchan-ee occurs at thebe-einnin-e of the swap with a re-exchange at maturity. The principal alnounts are based oninitial spot exchange rates.(d) Currency Option are contract that -eive the buyer the ri-eht but not tlre obligation to exchange(buy/sell) an amount of currency for another at a specific price on or before a pre specified date.For this ri-eht, the buyer pays a prernium. The ri-eht to buy is known as a Call Option while theri-eht to sell is known as Put Option. If suclr right can be exercised only on a specific maturitydate, the option is said to be a European Option. If such option can be exercised on any dateprior to its maturity, the option is called an American Option.(e) Interest Rate Options: is an option where the underlyin-e is not an asset but an interest rate. Aninterest rate Call Option is an option that grants the holder the right to make a fixed or knowninterest payment while an interest rate Put Option is an option that grants the holder the ri_eht tomake a variable or unknown interest payment and receive a fixed or known interest payment. Inan interest rate Cap for example, the seller agrees to compensate the buyer for the amount bywhich an underlying short-term rate exceeds a specified rate on a series of dates durin_e the life ofthe contract. In an interest rate Floor, the seller a-qrees to compensate the buyer for a rate fallingbellow the specified rate durin-e the contract period. A Collar is a combination of a long (short)cap and short (long) floor, struck at different rates payment while an interest rate related to thechange in an interest rate.(O Commodity Options are similar to Currency Optionscommodities for possible derivative transactions.4. Transaction Types

and Gold, Copper and Oil are identified as

Authorized Dealers en-qage in derivatives transactiorls in three main forms:(a) Transactions for the purpose of hedgin_e the banks own assets or liabilities for altering its riskprofile. These are known as End User deals (EUD).(b) Transactions executed by authorized dealers with its customers with intention of making aspread. In these transactions the commercial bank does not take any market risk on its ownbooks and covers the transaction on the same day on back-to-back basis. These types oftransactions are known as Non-Market Maker deals (NMM).(c) Transactions those involve derivative tradin-e services to customers and require financialinstitutions to quote prices to other customers/institutions while takirrg the market risk on bank'sown books. Such transactions are known as Derivatives Market Maker deal (DMM).5. Eligibility and Permissible Activity;(a) Only the commercial banks with capital adequacy ratio of more than I l%o are permitted to engagein derivative transactions. This Capital Adequacy Ratio is inclusive of derivative positiorrs andthe directions of the Director Bank Supervision (DBS) on risk wei,ehted capital should befollowed in determinin_e the Capital Adequacy Ratio.(b) Authorized Dealers should ensure that each of the transactions covered under these directionsis made only in respect of risk or exposures arising from permitted underlying transactions orgenuine balance sheet exposures. This is mandatory for customer transactiotls.(c) Under any circumstances, derivative transactious covered under these directions should not bepennitted throu-eh a bank abroad or a correspondent foreign bank to its customers in Sri Lanka inrespect of any forei-en currency exposures or risks arisin-e from currency deposit/export earningskept outside Sri Lanka.(d) Authorized Dealers slrould offer option contracts only in respect of a transaction and such risksarisin-e from -eenuine balance sheet exposures. This includes forward contracts involvin-eprecious metals.(e) Authorized Dealers should take steps to hed-ee their risk exposure with their correspondentoverseas banks or any other dornestic bank.(f) In order to develop and add liquidity to the market, Authorized Dealers are permitted to run openpositions witlr tlre lirnits specified by the mana_q,ement of the respective banks and approved bythe CBSL.

( xlii )Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

(g) At the initial sta-se the derivatives denorninated only in forei-en exchan-ee (not involvin-e LKR)will be allowed to be traded.6. Risk ManagementAuthorized Dealers should be required to ensure that adequate measures are taken to rnitigate credit risk,rnarket risk and operational risk and also its compliance with the provisions of the minimurn capitaladequacy requirements pertaining to derivative transactiorls. Appropriate policy lirnits, approved by theBank rlana_qement should be in place. The net cash flow arisin-9 from tl-rese transactiorts sl-rould be booked asincorne and expenditure and reconciled as an exchange position wherever applicable. This is not always thecase as all open positions should be marked to market and its value should be captured in the P& L and theBalance sheet.(a) Applicable for Currency Options(i) All NMM and DMM transactions need to be covered on back-to-back basis on the same daywithout allowin_e them to carry any open exposures as they may result in increased market risksto the bank. However DMM, in order to cover its forei,en exchan-ee position, may be allowed totrade in Vanilla Foreign Currency Options(ii) Such foreign currency options need to be included on a net delta weighted basis in the netforei-en exchan-ee exposure position reporting and shall be within such lirnits specified for thebank.(iii) DMM must cover all such transactions on a back-to-back basis. The transaction may beundertaken with a bank outside Sri Lanka, an internationally recognized option exchange or withanother DMM in Sri Lanka.(iv) Option contracts offered/designed as cost effective risk reduction structures or packagedcontracts shall not result in any net inflow of prernium to the customers or increase in risk in anymanner. Customers may unwind or sell back hedge if they consider such hed-ee is no longerrequired.(v) Option contracts cannot be used to hedge contingent or derived exposures except in case ofexposures arising from submission of tender bids in foreign exchange or such risks arising from

,eenuine balance sheet exposures(b) For All the Derivative Products Covered Under the Directions(i) The notional principal amount and the maturity of the hed-ee shall not exceed the outstandingamount and/or unexpired maturity of the underlyin-e asset/liability.(ii) A customer may enter into a hedge with any DMM irrespective of exposure bein-e booked in thatDMM or not.(iii) DMM can use these products for the purpose of hed-ein-e trading books and balance sheetexpos ures.(iv) All payments to be exchanged may be net settled i.e. only the difference between the payableand receivable amount is exchan-eed, provided such net settlement is allowed in the originala-qreement between the parties.(v) In case on insolvency, if the clairn of the counterparty provides for the netting of the mutualtransaction between tlre insolvent and the creditor. The amount payable by one party could beset off against tlre amount payable by the otlrer party arrd only the net balance is paid orreceived,(vi) NMM and DMM shall obtain an undertaking frorn customers that their total value of hedges donot exceed the value of the risk that is being hedged.(vii) Banks should put in place necessary systems for rnarkin-e to market tlre portfolio on a daily basis.Banks may agree upon a cornrnon industrial gatherin-s such as SLFA to publish daily matrix ofpolled irnplied volatility estimates, irnplied zero, forward and swap rates, which marketparticipants can use for markin-e to market their portfolio.(viii) Banks should train their staff adequately and put in place necessary risk managernent andinternal control and processing systems before undertakin-q any of these derivative transactions.

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005( xliii )

Parl lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 20oS

34t07 t02910001/001April 21, 2005Circular No.: RTGS/0312005To : All Participartts of LankaSettle S1,5ysn1

AT THE LANKASETTLE PRIMARY SITEThis is to inform you that the new versions of live CAS/CSS/Web Server applications/darabases will beinstalled at LankaSettle primary site on Saturday, April 30,2005 and the LankaSettle live system will be openedon May 2, 2005 for the limited purpose of testin-e the new versions with the live CAS and CSS systems. T6eLankaSettle system will not be opened on tlre aforementioned day for settlement of any valid transactions andwill be open only for the test transactiotts specified by the Information Technology Department of the CentralBank of Sri Lanka. Any forward dated settlement instruction remainin-e in CAS and CSS databases at the closeof business on April 29, 2005 will be cleared from the LankaSettle system and any messa-qes received witl-rvalue date of l:|v4ay 2, 2005 will not be considered as valid transactions for settlemenr.Therefore, you are requested:(i) Not to send any forward dated settlement instructions to LankaSettle system on April 29,2005; and(ii) To disregard all SWIFT messages related to LankaSettle which will have the value date of Mray Z,2005.

C. PremaratneSuperintendent of Public Debt

S.W.I.F.T User Id. Code (BIC)RTGS Settlernent AccountContact Details of National DevelopmentChief Executive Officer :Telephone :Fax :e-mail :

K.R.M. SiriwardhaneDirector of Payments and Settlements

34/07 t02910001/001July 29,2005Circular No. : RTGS/O4/2005To : All participants of LankaSettle Systent

PARTICIPANT IN LANKASETTLE SYSTEM

The Monetary Board has approved of issuin,e a cornmercial banking license to the National DeveloprnentBank Ltd. The Natioual Development Bank Ltd. has also been permitted to acquire the business of NDBBank Ltd. The NDB Bank Ltd. has informed us that such acquisition will take place with effect from AugustI,2005. Accordin-{ly, the arran-qements on LankaSettle with effect from Au-eust l, 2005 will be as follows.The National Development Bank Ltd. will become a Dealer Direct Participant on LankaSettle Systernand the customer accounts now lreld by NDB Bank Ltd. will be held by National Development Bank Ltd. ItsS.W.I.F.T User Identification Code (BIC) and RTGS Settlement Account Number will be:: NDBSLKLX: NDBSLKLXXXXO100044l6Bank Ltd. will be:Mr. N.S. Welikala2M88892MO262nihal.weli kala @ ndb.oreNDB Bank Ltd. will cease to operate as a participant in LankaSettle System with effect fl'om Au-eust 1,2005.The static data of LankaSettle Systern will be chan-eed as indicated below with effect fl'orn Au-eusr l, 2005:(i) Chan-eing the participant or-eanization narne NDB Bank Ltd in the LankaSettle Sysrern to NationalDevelopment Bank Ltd; and(ii) Chan-ein-q the account name NDB Bank Ltd Settlement Acct in the LankaSettle Systern to NationalDeveloprnent Batlk Setl Acct.

C. PremaratneSuperintendent of Public DebtK.R.M. SiriwardhaneDirector/Payments and Settletnents

( xliv )Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

34t07 /029/0001/001

Circular No : RTGS/05/2005To : All Participants of LankaSettle Svstent

Payrnents and Settlernents DepartrnentSeptenrber 28, 2005

SLBA, the Monetary Board of the Central Bank hasRules as per the announcement made at the above

Reference the announcement made by Central Bank at the Bank Mana-eers' Meetin-{ held on July 28, 2005 andlerter dated Au_eust 17, 2005 sent to the Secretary General of Sri Lanka Banks Association (Guarantee) Ltd.(SLBA) requesting cornments and observations of banks on the issue of irnposin,e a default charge on banksfor failure to mail'ttain adequate funds in their RTGS Settlernent Accounts for settling net clearin,e obligationsat stipulated times as per tlre Systern Rules of LankaSettle System.Having considered the response received frotn theapproved of an amendment to the LankaSettle Systemrnentioned meetine.Accordingly, you are hereby informed that Clause 8.3 of Volume 2 of LankaSettle System Rules issuedin August,2003 will be amended as per Annex I with effect frorn October l, 2005.

K.R.M. SiriwardhaneDirector, Payments and Settlelnents

{nnex I

AMENDMENT TO RULE 8.3: SETTLEMENT BATCH SUSPENSION OR FAILUREDUE TO INSUFFICIENT FUNDS

Participants must ensure that there are sufficient available funds in their Settlement Account to allowirnrnediate processin_e of a Net Settlernent Batch. In tl're event that any one or more Participants with a netdebit clearing fi_eure does not have sufficient funds in its Settlernent Accouttt to allow the debit to be made,the entire batclr will be suspended. No debits or credits will be made in a Net Settlement Batch unless allParticipants with a net debit clearing fi-eure have sufficient funds to allow the debits to be made. Upon a NetSettlement Batch lnstruction being entered into the Systeln, the Central Bank shall have the ri-eht to earmarkfunds in a Participant's Settlement Account upto a Participant's net debit clearing fi-qure and to withhold theprocessing of Instructions to debit sucl'l account until the Batch Settlement is effected.

However, it shall be the responsibility of each Participant to ensure that sufficient funds are available inits Settlement Account at the times stipulated in the Daily Operating Schedule for processin,e of a NetSettlement Batch until such settlentent is effected. The non-availability of sufficient funds in the SettlementAccount of a Participant with a net debit clearin-u fi,eure to allow the debit to be made will render hirn liable toa default char-ee as follows :

Rs.100,000/= for the first hour or any part tlrereof ;Rs.200,0001= for the next hour or any part thereof ;An additional surn of Rs.500,000/= if the insufficiency of funds extends beyond two hours.The default char-se shall accrue from the tirne that the clearing batch is first subrnitted for settlelnent tothe RTGS up to the tirne of settlement of tlre batch. However, if a defaulting Participant infuses sufficientfulds to its Settlement Account to tneet its failed payment obli-eations prior to the actual settlement andmairrtains suclr funds, in acldition to nleetin-e its other payrnent obli-eations as they becotne due on the RTGS,the default char_ee slrall accrue only up to tlie tirne of the infusion of suclr funds to the Settlernent Accoutlt.

The Central Bank lnay initiate a retry of a failed Net Settlernent Batch at any tirne after the failure subject to otlrer

scheduled net settlerneut alran-qemenrs on the RTGS. This is done at the discretion of the Central Bank and it is llotobligatory on the Cenrral Bank to initiate a retry before the times indicated irr the Daily Operatin-e Schedule.

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Repod - 2005(xlv)

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

The default clrar-ee shall be debited fi'orn the Settlernent Account on tlre next business day after the businessday on which the default occurred and shall be credited to the Central Barrk, Ten percent (10%) of each defaultchar-ee so credited shall be deducted as an adrninistrative char-ee by the Central Bank and the balance shall beavailable for utilization for training of bankers and shall be paid for such purpose upon an application bein_emade by the Sri Lanka Banks' Association (Guararrtee) Ltd. to the Central Bank in a prescribed lnaltner.If a participant defaults on Inore than one occasion durin-g a petiod of one year, the Central Bank may,ttotwithstandin-e the fact that such a requirernerrt has not been irnposed olr other participants, require suchparticipant to maintain a stipulated rninirnurn balance in its RTGS Settlement Account for tlre purpose ofsettlin-e clearin-e balances at the stipulated tirnes.Each Participant rnust nominate a senior officer that tlre Central Bank may contact in tlre eveilt that a NetSettlernent Batch is suspended as a result of insufficient funds. Upon being so informed, a Participant Inustmake imrnediate arrangemeuts to fund its Settlernent Account to enable tlre settlerneut to be cornpleted. It is,however, not obli-eatory on the Central Bank to inforrn a Participant of insufficiency of funds and a Participantis fully responsible for ensurin-e the sufficiency of funds irr its Settlernent Account.If a Net Settletnent Batch is still suspended at close of business, all transactions in the batch will be rejected.Any default char-ee irnposed shall not be in substitution or dero-sation of, or preclude the exercise bythe Central Bank or any Participant of, any right or clairn which the Central Bank or the Participant has or isentitled to in any action, suit or proceeding in a court of law arisin-e from the failure of any Participant to settlean obli-eation in a Net Settlement Batch,

Volume 2

34107 t02910001/001Septernber 30, 2005

Circular No. :RTGS/07 t200sTo : All participattts of LankaSettle Systent

CHANGE OF NAME OF MUSLIM COMMERCIAL BANK LTD.

As Muslirn Commercial Bank Ltd. has chan-eed its narne to MCB Bank Ltd. tlre static data of LankaSettleSystem will be chan_eed as indicated below with effect from October 01,2005:(i) Changin-e the participarrt or-eanization name of Muslim Cornrnercial Bank Ltd to MCB Bank Ltd; and(ii) Chan-eing the accourlt name of Muslirn Comrnercial Bank Ltd. in the LankaSettle Systern from MuslirnCornmercial Bank Settl Acct to MCB Bank Ltd Settlerneut Acct.The SWIFT BIC of the Bank will remain unchansed,

C. PremaratneSuperintendent of Public DebtK.R.M. SiriwardhaneDirector/Payrnents and Settlements

Ref : 08/24 / 002 / 0005/005

Cltief Executive Officers of Printart, Dealers,

Public Debt DepartmentJanuaty 18,2005

DIRECTION ON ENHANCEMENT OF MINIMUM CAPITAL REQUIREMENT OFPRIMARY DEALERS

This direction is issued in ternrs of section 12 <tf the Re-er.rlation dated February l,20OZ issued b),the Minister ofFiuance under the Registered Stocks and Securities Ordinance and the Local Treasurl, Bills Ordinance.

( xlvi )Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Reood - 2005

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

11 telns of the direction on Minirnurn Capital Requirement issued on 28 Novernber 2003 PrirnaryDealers (pDs) were requirecl to maintain Rs 350 million as minirnum capital before 31 Decernber'2004'However, some PDs were unable to meet this requirement by 3l December 2004. Considerin-e this situatiottald the current market conditions, tlre Monetary Board decided to extend the deadline from 3l December

2004 to I July 2OO5 for the PDs to comply with the minirnum capital requirement of Rs 350 rnillion-pDs are required to comply with the above requirernent subject to the condition that any PD who

wislres to declare profits as dividends durin-e the period frorn 3l Decernber 2004 to I July 2005 shall obtairrthe prior approval of the Central Bank to do so.Dr W M HemachandraSuperintendent of Public Debt

Ref : 08/2 4 | 002 | OO05/005

Chief Executive Officers of Prinnry Dealers,

Public Debt DeparttnentApril 18, 2005

PRIMARY DEALERS

This directiol is issued in terms of section 12 of the Regulation dated February I, 2002 issued by the Minister of

Finance under the Registered Stocks and Securities Ordinance and the Local Treasury Bills Ordinance.l. Primary Dealers (PDs) are required to increase minimum capital from,a. Existing Rs 200 million to Rs 250 million from I July 2005 andb. Rs 250 million to Rs 300 million from I July 2006

instead of Rs 350 million as per the CBSL directions on 28 November 2003 and 18 January 2005-Z. pDs who maintain a capital between Rs 250 rnillion - Rs 300 million are allowed to declare 25Va ofprofits as dividends with effect from I July 2005.3. pDs who maintain a capital above Rs 300 rnillion are required to allocate 25Vo of profits anrually to a

special reserve with effect frorn I July 2005. Direction on special risk reserve issued on 28 Novetnber

2003 will be lapsed after 30 June 2005.4. pDs are allowed to maintain up ro a maximum 50Vo of Tier -I capital as Tier II capital with effect fromI July 2005.5. pDs are required to irnplement the Risk Weighted Capital Adequacy Framework with a minimumcapital requirement of Rs 300 million with effect frorn I July 2006-

Superintendent of Public Debt

ogt25t001/0034/001

Circular No. SSSS /Ol/2005To: AII Participants of LankaSettle Svstent.

September 30, 2005

you are hereby informed that tlre first para-eraph of Clause 5.8 of Volurne 3 of LankaSettle Systern Rules issuedin August 2003 is amended to read as follows with effect from October 1,2005'.,LankaSecure will accept Securities Instructions for settlemetrt on future Value Dates and will store suchinstructiols until suclr Value Date. The Systenr will accept Securities Instructions for up to 3l calendar daysin advance of current date and Seculities Irrstnrctions witlr future Value Dates greater than 3l calendar days in

advance will be rejected."

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005( xtvii )

Paft lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

Accordin-ely, clause 5.8 of Volurne 3 of the LankaSettle Systern Rules will read as follows with effectfrorn October l, 2005."5.8 Forward Dated TransactionsLankaSecure will accept Securities Instructions for settlenrent on future Value Dates arrd will store suchinstructiot'ls until such Value Date. The Systern will accept Securities Instructions for up to 3l calendar claysin advance of currertt date and Securities Instructions with future Value Dates -greater than 3l caleldar daysin advance will be rejected.If a Securities Instruction is received by LankaSecure that has a value Date tlrat has already passed itwill be rejected.At the start of each Business Day LankaSecure checks that each stored Securities Instruction has a validValue Date. If a stored Securities Instruction has a value date that lras already passed it will be rejected.In the event that a Business Day is "cancelled", e.-e.a day on which due to extraordinary circurnstancesthe Central Bank is not open for business, it is the responsibility of the Participarrt to cancel stored SecuritiesInstructions for that Value Date or re-send them followin-e rejection with a new Value Date."

C PremaratneSuperintendent of Public DebtK R M SiriwardhaneDirector/Payrnents aud Settlements

The Direction given by the Monetary Board ofCompanies Act, No 78 of 1988 as amended by

Colombo.3l January 2005

the central Bank of Sri Lanka under section 9 of the FinanceAct. No 23 of 1991.

Sunil MendisClrainnanMonetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka

l. This Direction may be cited as the Finance Companies (Deposits) Direction No.t of 2005 and shallapply to every finance company re-eistered in terms of Section 2 of the Finance Companies Act No.78of 1988 as amended by Act No.23 of l99l and shall corne into operarion with irnmediate effect.2- A finance compally shall not accept any deposit repayable on demand or any time deposit repayable after aperiod of less than one month frorn the date of receipt of such deposit or rnore than sixty months frorn the date ofreceipt of such deposit, and shall not renew any tirne deposit received by it, unless such deposit so renewed isrepayable not earlier than one month and not later than sixty months from the date of such renewal. However, afinance company may accept savin-as deposits subject to the provisiorrs of this Direction, Finance Companies@eposits - Incentive Schemes) Direction No.5 of 2001, Finance Cor:rpanies (Capital Funds) Direction No.l of2003, Finance Companies (Interest) Direction No.2 of 2005, Finance Cornpanies (Liquid Assets) Directiog No,3of 2005 and Finance Cornpanies (Advertisin-e) Rule No.l of 2001.3.(i) Every finance colnpany shall furnish to every depositor a certificate in respect of each and everytilne deposit received which for all purposes shall be deerned to be an acknowled-eernent ofacceptance of a certain sum of rnoney by the finance company. In the case of renewal of a timedeposit a renewal notice shall be issued to the depositor concerned.(ii) Every such certificate or renewal notice shall be sigrred by two officers wlro are autlrorised by theBoard of Directors of the finance company for the purpose of acceptin_q/renewing deposits andissuing of such acknowled-eement/renewal notice indicatin-e clearly the followin_e inforrnation:-(a) re-gistered name and address of the finarrce contparly;(b) date of deposit/renewal of deposit;(c) natne of depositor, national identity card number ol passpoft number arrd the address of tlre depositor;(d) alnount of nroney received by the finance conrpany by way of deposit or renewal of depositin words and fisures:

( xlviii )Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Reoort - 2005

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

(e) The annual rate of interest payable and the basis of payment (rnonthly or at maturity);(0 Date on which the deposit is repayable;(g) Names of officers who sign the acknowledgement/renewal notice;(h) Serial number of the certificate; and(i) Account number of the deposit.4. Every finance company shall maintain a record of the following particulars in respect of each time deposit:-(a) Account number;(b) Name, address and National Identity Card number or passport number of each depositor;(c) Principal amount of such deposit;(d) Date of deposit/date of renewal;(e) Duration and the maturity date of each deposit;(f) Rate of interest and the basis of payment of interest (monthly or at maturity);(g) The amount of accrued interest (if any);(h) Date and amount of each payment (principal or interest); and(i) Serial number of the certificate.5. Every finance company upon acceptance of savings deposits shall issue to a depositor, a documentcontaining the terms governing the operations of savings accounts in all three languages and a passbook or such other document acceptable to the Director for recording the operations of the accountincluding the following particulars:-(a) Registered name and address of the finance company;(b) Name of the branch;(c) Name, date of birth, National Identity Card(d) Account number.6. Every finance company shall maintain a record of the(a) Name, date of birth, National Identity Card(b) Account number;(c) Date, amount and description of every credit or debit made to the savings account; and(d) Outstanding balance at any particular time.7. Every finance company shall submit to the Director a statement, within three months after the end ofevery financial year, giving the following particulars, as at the end of such financial year, in respect ofevery time deposit which has not been repaid/renewed by the finance company after the date on whichthe deposit became due for repayment or renewal as the case may be:-(a) Name and address of the depositor;(b) Amount of the deposit;(c) Amount of the accrued interest;(d) Last date on which any written correspondence was received bydepositor or his/her lawful representative; and(e) Action taken or proposed to be taken by the finance company for theof the deposit and its accrued interest.8. Every finance company shall submit to the Director a statement, within three months after the end ofevery financial year, giving the following particulars, as at the end of such financial year, on everysavings account in respect of which there has been no deposit or withdrawal for 5 years or more:-(a) Name and address of the account holder;(b) Amount outstanding including accumulated interest as at the end of the immediately precedingfinancial year;Last date on which any written colnrnunicdtion was received from the depositor or his/herlawful representative; andAction taken or proposed to be taken by the finance company to repay the amount outstandingon the account.9. A finance company shall not accept any funds to the credit of a savings accourlt unless it is in the form ofcash or any acceptable money transfer document such as a clreque issued in favour of the account holder.l0.In this Direction:-(i) "Tirne deposit" means any deposit accepted by a finance company with an agreement to repayafter a specified period of time;(ii) "Director" lneans the Director of the Departrnerrt of Supervision of Non-Bank FinancialInstitutions'of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka;

number and the address of the account holder: and

following particulars in respect of each savings account:-

number and the address of the account holder:

the company from the

repayment of the amount

(c)

(d)

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2OOs( xlix )

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

(iii) "Board of Directors" lneans the Board of Directors of the cornpany, other than any directorsappointed by the Monetary Board of the Cerrtral Bank of Sri Lanka.I l. The Finance Cornpanies (Deposits) Direction No. I of 2002 is hereby revoked.

AS AMENDED BY ACT NO. 23 OF 1991

The Direction given by the Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka under section 9 of t5e FinanceCompanies Act, No. 78 of 1988 as amended by Act No.23 of 1991.

Sunil MendisChairmanMonetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka

Colombo.3l January 2OO5

l. This Direction may be cited as the Finance Cornpanies (Interest) Direction No.2 of 2005 and shallapply to every finance company registered in terms of section 2 of the Finance Companies Act, No. 78of 1988 as amended by Act No. 23 of l99l and shall come into operation with immediate effect.2. (a) The maximum annual rate of interest which may be paid by any finance company on a time depositaccepted or renewed during any quarter shall not exceedl-(i) The weighted average yield applicable to 364-day Treasury Bills issued during the immediatelypreceding quarter increased by 3 percentage points if such deposit carries a maturity period of 12months or less:(ii) The weighted avera-qe yield applicable to 364-day Treasury Bills issued during theimmediately preceding quarter increased by 6 percentage points if such deposit carries amaturity period of more than 12 months.(b) The maximum rate of discount which may be allowed by a finance company on the sale, duringany quarter, of a bond or other instrument of which the price is less than the redeemable value atmaturity shall be such that tlre maximum annual yield on the instrument shall not exceed:-(i) The wei-ehted average yield applicable to 364-day Treasury Bills issued during theimrnediately preceding quarter increased by 3 percentage points if such bond or instrumentcarries a period of maturity of 12 months or less;(ii) The weighted average yield applicable to 364-day Treasury Bills issued during theimmediately preceding quarter increased by 6 percentage points if such bond or insrrumentcarries a maturity period of more than 12 months.3. The rnaxirnum annual rate of interest which may be paid by a finance company on any savings deposit,during any quarter shall not exceed the weighted average yield applicable to 90-day Treasury Billsissued during the immediately preceding quarter.4. In this Direction, "time deposit" shall have the same meanin,e as in the Finance Companies (Deposits)Direction No. I of 2005.5. The Finance Companies (Interest) Direction No. 6 of 2001 is hereby revoked.

AS AMENDED BY ACT NO. 23 OF 1991

The Directiort given by the Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka under section 9 of the FinanceCompanies Act, No. 78 of 1988 as amended by Act No. 23 of 1991.

Sunil MendisChainnanMonetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri LankaColombo31 January 2005

(t)Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

3.

4.

7.

8.

5.

6.

FINANCE COMPANIES (LIQUID ASSETS)DIRECTION NO. 3 OF 2OO5

l. This Directiorl may be cited as the Finance Companies (Liquid Assets) Direction No.3 of 2005 andshall apply to eveiy finance company re-eistered in terms of section 2 of the Finance Cornpanies Act,No. 7g of 1988 as amended by -Act No. 23 of l99l and shall corne into operation with imrnediate

effect.Z. Every finance company shatl maintain a minimum holding of liquid assets as_ defined in section 46 of

the Finance Companiei Act, No. 78 of 1988 as amended by Act No. 23 of 1991 which shall not, at the

close of the business on any day, be less than the total of :(i) Fifteen percent of -(a) the outstanding value of the time deposits received by the finance company at the close ofthe business on such daY; and(b) tl-re face value of certificates of deposit issued !y the finance company, as appearing on thebooks of the finance company at the close of tlre business on such day; and(ii) Twenty percent of the outstanding value of savings deposits accepted by such company, at theclose of the business on such daY.Every finance company shall furnish monthly to the Director a statement certifying the total de_positliabiiities and liquid aisets as at the close of business on the last working day of each week of that

month on a forrnat to be prescribed by the Director. If the last working day of the month does notcoincide with the last woiking day of the last week of such month, it should be made to the lastworking day of the month. Such statement shall be forwarded to the Director on or before the fifteenthday of the following month.Every finance company shall at all times maintain assets in the form of Sri Lanka GovernmentTreaiury Bills, Sri Lanka Government Securities and Central Bank of Sri Lanka Securities equivalentto ten (tO; p"..ent of the average of its month end total deposit liabilities of the twelve months of thepreceding financial year.The Sri Lanka Government Treasury Bills, Sri Lanka Government Securities and Central Bank of SriLanka Securities referred to in paragraph 4 above will constitute a part of liquid assets referred to in

paragraph 2 above.Sri Lanka Government Treasury Bills, Sri Lanka Government Securities and Central Bank of Sri LankaSecurities held by a finance .o*puny in compliance with the provisions of paragraph 4 above shall bekept in the cusiody of one or more licensed commercial banks or one or more primary dealer

companies. Every finance company shall submit to the Director a weekly statement obtained from suchbalk/banks or primary dealei company/companies giving particulars of such Bills/Securities in aformat to be prescribed by the Director'Every finance company shall furnish to the Director a statement showing its month end total depositliabiiities during thi twelve months of the preceding financial year on or before the fifteenth (15) dayof the month following the end of such financial year.In this Direction,(i) ,.Time deposit" shall have the same meaning as in the Finance Companies (Deposits) DirectionNo.l of 2005;(ii) ..Total deposit liabilities" consist of time deposits, certificates of deposits and savings deposits;(iii) ..Director" means the Director of the Department of Supervision of Non-Bank FinancialInstitutions of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka;(iv) .,Licensed Commercial Bank" means a Licensed Comrnercial Bank within the meaning of the

Bankin-e Act, No. 30 of 1988;(v) ,.prirnary Dealer Company" rneans a Prirnary Dealer Company within the meaning of the LocalTreasury Bills Ordinon.. (Primary Dealers) Regulations No. I of 2002 tnade under section l6 ofthe Local Treasury Bills Ordinance (Chapter 420) as last amended by Act No.31 of 1995 andthe Registered Stock and Securities Ordinance (Prirnary Dealers) Regulation No. I of 2OO2made under section 55 of the Registered Stock and Securities Ordinance (Chapter 420) as last

amended by Act No. 32 of 1995'g. The Finance Cornpanies (Liquid Assets) Direction No. 7 of 1991 as amended by the FinanceCornpalies (Liquid Assets - Amendment) Direction No. 4 of 2O0l is hereby revoked.

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005(I)

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

AS AMENDED BY ACT NO. 23 OF I99I

The Direction givenCompanies Act, No.

Colombo.3l January 2OO5

2.

3.

4.

by the Monetary Board of78 of 1988 as arnended bythe central Bank of sri Lanka under section 9 of the FinanceAct No. 23 of 1991.

Sunil MendisChairmanMonetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka

This Direction may be cited as the Finance Companies (Closure of Office/s for Business) DirectionNo.4 of 2005 and shall apply to every finance company registered in terms of section 2 of the FilanceCompanies Act, No.78 of 1988 as amended by Act No.23 of l99l and shall come into operation withimmediate effect.No _finance company shall close its office/s for business on any day of the week from Monday toFriday, which is not a holiday declared by the Ceylon Chamber of Commerce, without the priorapproval in writing of the Director.In granting approval required under 2 above, the Director may impose conditions as he/she may deem necessary.In this Direction, "Director" means the Director of the Department of Supervision of Non-BankFinancial Institutions of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka.5. The Finance Companies (Closure of Business) Direction No.14 of l99l is hereby revoked.

AS AMENDED BY ACT NO. 23 OF 1991

The Direction given by the Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka under section 9 of the Financecompanies Act, No. 78 of 1988 as amended by Act No. 23 of 199r.

Sunil MendisChairrnanMonetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri LankaColombo.29 December 2005

I ' This Direction may be cited as the Finance Companies (Sfiuctural Changes) Direction. No. 5 of 2005 and shallapply to every finance cgTp1ny_ registered in terms of section 2 of the Finance Companies Act, No. 78 of 1988as amended by Act No.23 of l99l and shall come into operation with effect from O2'January 2006.2- No finance company to which a licence has been issued shall, without the prior approval in writing ofthe Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka(a) establish any subsidiary or associate company;(b) commence a new business activity which is not directly related to finance business, hirepurchase or pawning;(c) enhance or reduce its issued capital;(d) sell its business;(e) acquire wl'rether whole or in part of the business of any other finance company;(0 change its Memorandum of Association or Articles of Association;(g) amal-eamate, consolidate or merge the company with any other finance company;(h) restructure the management of the cornpany.3. In this Direction, "finance business" shall have the same meaning as contained in the definition in' section 46 of the Finance Companies Act, No. 78 of 1988.

NO.4 0F 2005

(ffi)Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005

Pad lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

AS AMENDED BY ACT NO. 23 OF 1991

The Direction given by tlre Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka under section 9 of the FinanceCompanies Act, No. 78 of 1988 as amended by Act No. 23 of 1991.

Sunil MendisChairmanMonetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri LankaColombo.29 December 2OO5

l.OFFICES) DIRECTION NO. 6 OF 2OO5

This Direction may be cited as the Finance Companies (Opening/Shifting/Closure of Branches/Offices)Direction No. 6 of 2005 and shall apply to every finance company registered in terms of section 2 ofthe Finance Companies Act, No. 78 of 1988 as amended by Act No. 23 of l99l and shall come intooperation with effect from 02 January 2O06.No finance company to which a licence has been issued shall, without the prior approval in writing of theDirector -(a) open a new place of business;(b) change the location of any of its business places; or(c) close any of its business places.3. In this Direction "Director" means the Director of the Department of Supervision of Non-BankFinancial Institutions of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka'

FINANCE COMPANIES ACT. NO. 78 OF 1988AS AMENDED BY ACT NO. 23 OF 1991

The Rules made by the Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka under section 33 read with sections 2(2), 6,7(l) and 7(3) of the Finance Companies Act, No. 78 of 1988 as amended by Act No. 23 of 1991.

Sunil MendisChairmanMonetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri LankaColombo.29 December 2005

FINANCE COMPANIES REGISTRATION AND LICENSING) RULES NO. 1 OF 2OO5

1. These Rules may be cited as the Finance Companies (Registration and Licensing) Rules No. I of 2005and shall appliei to any fin-ance company to which sectiott 2 of the Finance Companies Act, No. 78 of1988 appliei and shall come into operation with effect from 02 January 2OO6 with the exception ofRules 5 and 6, the effective dates of which are specifically mentioned.2. Every application for registration by a company shall be made in duplicate in'Form Al'of theSchedule hereto, which is obtainable from the Director.3. The Re*eister maintained for the registration of every finance company shall be substantially in 'Fortn

B I' of the Schedule hereto.4. The licence issued to any finance company shall be substantially in 'Form C' of the Schedule hereto.5. The licence fee payable by a finance company for the year of first registration shall be Rs. 20,000 untilthe end of 2006 and Rs 50,000 thereafter, and shall be paid to the Central Bank of Sri Lanka on orbefore the date of registration in proportion to the rernaining number of days in the year.6. Every finance company registered under the Finance Companies Act No. 78 of 1988 shall pay to the

')

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005( liii )

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

Central Bank of Sri Lanka the annual licence fee of Rs. 20,000 until the end of 2OO6 and the annuallicettce fee of Rs. 50,000 thereafter, within 30 days prior to the end of the precedin-e calendar year.In this Directiott. "Director" rneans the Director of the Department of Supervision of Non-BarrkFinancial Institutions of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka.The Finartce Cornpanies (Re-eistration and Licensin,e) Rules No. I of 1990 is hereby revoked.

N.B. Form AI, Form BI and Form C are not included in this Report. These fornts hat,e been publishedin the Extraordinarv Gaz.ette No. 1425/16 dated 29. 12. 2005.

24tOr/01s/004/003

Department of Supervision ofNon-Bank Financial Institutions.l0 May 2005To: AII Registered Finance CompaniesDear Sir/Madam.

DIRECTION ON CAPITAL ADEOUACY -AMENDMENTS TO INSTRUCTIONSWe write to inform you that the Monetary Board has permitted to include Redeemable, Cumulative,Preference shares in the Subordinated Term Debt constituent of the Tier 2 - Supplementary Capital subjectto certaitr conditions. Accordingly, Item 34 of Section C of the Instructions issued along witlr the FinanceCompanies (Risk Wei-ehted Capital Adequacy Ratio) Direction No.2 of 2003 is amended as follows:"34. Approved Unsecured Subordinated Term DebtThis constituent includes:(i) An unsecured subordinated term debt, which satisfies the following conditions:(a) yJJ.'.'J.'"T',lt'ilol'fil,Jt.?f iJ;ol','"'lll'i"ll,'X"".'"ffi ii"f,'J;'"",t';:UlXi',:1?1"*'i;rs or

(b) A rninirnum ori-einal maturity of an instrument to be 5 years;(c) No early repayment or redemption to be made without the prior consent of the Central Bank ofSri Lanka; and(d) Discounting of the amount counted as capital by l/5'h each year durin-e the four years precedingmaturlty.(ii) Redeemable Cumulative Preference Shares, which satisfy the following conditions:(a) Such preference shares should be issued and redeemed in accordance with the provisions of theCornpanies Act, No. 17 of 1982, in particular, section 57 thereof;(b) Such preference shares should not be redeemed within the first five years from the date of issuewithout the prior approval of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka;(c) Such preference shares should be unsecured, subordinated and fully paid; and(d) Durin-e the last five years to rnaturity, a curnulative discount factor of 2O per cent per yearshould be applied to reflect the dirninishing value of those instruments as a continuin! sourceof strengtlr.Prior approval of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka is required for inclusion of any such debt instrumentand redeernable cumulative preference shares into Tier 2 Capital.Approved unsecured subordinated term debts (including Redeernable Cumulative Preference Shares)are lirnited to 50 per cetlt of Total Tier I Capital. The actual amount of unsecured subordilated terrn debtsand Redeernable Cumulative Preference Shares should also be reported separately."

Yours faithfully,Director

7.

8.

(liv)Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

24t0u0t510041o03Department of SuPervision ofNon-Bank Financial Institutionsl1 Mav 2005To: AII Registered Finance Contpanies

Dear Sir/Madam,

GUIDELINES TO ALL REGISTERED FINANCE

We write to inform you that the Monetary Board has approved of issuing the following guidelines inconnection with the inclusion of revaluation reserves in 'capital funds' for the purpose of the Finance

Companies (Capital Funds) Direction No.1 of 2OO3, Finance Companies (Investments) Direction No'12 of19gl as amended by the Direction No.3 of 2001, Finance Companies (Fixed Assets) Direction No.ll of l99l

and the Finance Cornpanies (Single Borrower Limit) Direction No.1 of L992-(i) The valuation is to be undertaken with the prior approval of the Central Bank;(ii) An asset would qualify for revaluation only after '7 years from the previous date of valuation or fromthe date of purchase, whichever is later;(iii)The asset should be valued by a valuer who is;(a) a chartered valuation surveyor; or(b) a fellow of the Institute of Valuers (Sri Lanka) with a Degree or Diploma in Valuation and withwork experience of over 15 Years; or(c) a graduate member of the Institute of Valuers (Sri Lanka) with work experience of over 18years; or(d) an associate of the Institute of Valuers (Sri Lanka) with work experience of over 20 years; or(e) a licentiate of the Institute of Valuers (Sri Lanka) with work experience of over 25 years.please note that registered finance companies have been following these guidelines in terms of an

understanding reached wiih the Central Bank through the Finance Houses Association of Sri Lanka. Now,the guidelines are issued in this manner to formalize the procedure.

Please acknowledge receipt of this letter.Yours faithfully,Director

24t0u01s10041003Department of SuPervision ofNon-Bank Financial Institutions27 Julv 2OO5

To: All Registered Finance Companies

Dear Sir,

We write to inform you that the Monetaryperforming advances on account of sales ofof the Finance Companies (Risk Weightedfollowing .conditions:

Board has approved of assigning areal estate made on an instalmentCapital Adequacy Ratio) Direction

risk weight of 50 percent forpayment basis for the PurPoseNo.2 of 2003, subject to the

(lv)Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

(a) The Re-eistered Finance Company (RFC) entering into an agreement with the buyer of tlre real estate specifyingthat the title of the property will not be transferred to the borrower until the amount agreed is fully paid;(b) Any sales of real estate made ou an iustalment payment basis in respect of wlich payment ofinstalments have been in arrears for tnore than 6 rnonths be assi-ened the risk wei_eht of io{i p.r..,rt;and(c) Performing and non-performing (instalments are in arrears for more than 6 rnonths) real estate salesmade on an instalment basis, should be shown separately by RFCs in the General Led_eer.ctlons the Finance Companies (Risk Weighted Capital AdequacyRati 3 have ed by introducing a new item titled " Loans against sale ofreal ment b ans)" and two sub items titled "Performing SR-E loans" and*Non-performing SRE loans". The numbers assigned to these items/sub items are 08.b6, 08.06.01 and08.06.02, respectively. The item l'Other Loans and Advances" has been renumbered as 08.07. A copy of therevised sections in the Instructions is enclosed.Please acknowledge receipt of this letter.Yours faithfully,Director

FINANCE LEASING ACT, NO. 56 OF 2000

Direction given by the Director of the Department of Supervision of Non-Bank Financial Institutions, undersection 34 of the Finance Leasing Act, No. 56 of 2000.Mrs. L K GunatilakeDirectorDepartment of supervision of Non-Bank Financial InstitutionsCentral Bank of Sri LankaOn this 28'h day of Decernber, 2005

l.This Direction may be cited as the Finance Leasing (Minimum Capital) Direction No.l of 2005 andshall apply to every registered finance leasing establishment, other than licensed commercial banksand licensed specialised banks which are governed by the Banking Act, No.30 of 1988, registeredfinance companies which are governed by the Finance Companies Act, No.78 of 1988 and anyinstitution that may be registered under the provisions of se.ction 44A of the Finance Leasing Act, No.56 of 2O0O as amended by Act No. 24 of 2005. The Direction shall come into operation with effectfrom 2 January 2006.Every registered finance leasing establishment to which this direction is applicable (herein afterreferred to as a "relevant establishment") shall maintain at all times an unimpaired core capital of anamount not less than the minimum issued and paid up capital prescribed by the Minister under theprovisions of section 3(c) of the Finance Leasing Act, No. 56 of 2000.3. Where the core capital of any relevant establishment is below the amount prescribedthe rninigrurn issued and paid up capital at the commencement of tlris Direction, thesuch establishment a period of one year from the cornmencement of this Direction

by the Mitrister asDirector may giveto comply with therequirement under this Direction.4. For the purpose of this Direction, "core capital" shall mean the aggregate of the(a) issued and paid-up ordinary share capital;(b) issued and paid-up non-redeemable, non-curnulative preference shares;

following -

(c) share premium;(d) tlre Reserve Fund maintained under the Finance Leasing (Reserve Fund) Direction No. 6 of 2005;(e) reserves which are not earmarked for any specified purpose by statute or by the Sri LankaAccourrtin-e Standards;(f) retained profits or accumulated losses;(g) current year profits or losses; and

2.

( h,i1Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

(h) general provision for bad and doubtful debts which is an amount provided over and above thespecific provision on the non-performing portfolio and an additional specific provision on theperforrnin-e portfolio, subject to confirrnation by the auditors.5. For the purpose of this Direction, "Director" means the Director of the Department of Supervision ofNon-Bank Financial Institutions of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka.

FINANCE LEASING ACT, NO. 56 OF 2OOO

Direction given by the Director of the Department of Supervision of Non-Banksection 34 of the Finance Leasing Act, No. 56 of 2000.Mrs L K GunatilakeDirectorDepartment of Supervision ofCentral Bank of Sri LankaOn this 28'h day of December,

Non-Bank Financial Institutions

2005

Financial Institutions. under

as Treasury bills, Treasury bonds and fixedspecialised bank or in a registered finance

l.

2.

FINANCE LEASING (PROVISION FOR BAD AND DOUBTFUL DEBTS)DIRECTION NO. 2 OF 2OO5

This Direction may be cited as the Finance Leasing (Provision for Bad and Doubtful Debts) DirectionNo.2 of 2005 and shall apply to every registered finance leasing establishment, other than licensedcommercial banks and licensed specialised banks which are governed by the Banking Act, No.30 of1988 and registered finance companies which are governed by the Finance Companies Act, No.78 of1988. The Direction shall come into operation with effect from 2 January 2006.Every registered finance leasing establishment to which this direction is applicable (hereinafterreferred to as a "relevant establishment") shall make provision for bad and doubtful debts before anyprofit or loss is declared and ensure that such provision is made subject to a minimum of -(a) twenty per cent (ZOVo) of all accommodations in arrears for a period of 6 months and upto 12months;(b) fifty per cent (SOVa) of all accommodations in arrears for a period of 12 months and upto 18 months;(c) hundred per cent (l00%o) of all accommodations in arrears for a period of 18 months and over;(d) hundred per cent (l0o7o) of all accommodations where instalments are not paid on a monthlybasis, whenever the company has realised that instalments will not be paid on the due dates.Director may require any relevant establishment to make further specific provision for bad anddoubtful debts in addition to the provision already made by such establishment.A relevant establishment may deduct the value of the following items held as collateral in respect of aparricular accommodation in arriving at the provisions required by 2(a) to 2(d) above -

3.

4.

5.

6.

(a) cash or cash equivalents (including securities suchdeposits in a licensed commercial bank, licensedcompany, free of any lien or charge);(b) bank guarantees;(c) with regard to vehicles that have been repossessed by the relevant establishment, eighty per cent (8OVo)of thb valuation obtained during the precedin-e six months from a valuer Approved by the Director.(d): with regard to land and buildings, the full value, in case of a primary mortgage. Such value shall notexceed the value decided by a professional valuer (guidelines for selection of valuers are given inAnnex l*) at the time of providing the accommodation. However, occupied residential propertiestaken as security without an agreement to hand over vacant possession in the event of sale for therecovery of dues, shall not be deducted in arrivin-e at the required provision.A relevant establishment may provide an additional specific amount for bad and doubtful debts basedon the risk associated with the portfolio of performing accommodation and such amount shall not beincluded as an additional general provision in core capital or capital funds.Where rescheduling occurs before an account is classified as non-performing, the rescheduled accountshall be classified as non-perforrning when, in the aggregate, the period of time the account is inarrears before reschedulin-e (if any) and after rescheduling is six months or more.

( lvii )Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

7. Where rescheduling occurs after an account has been classified as non-performing, the rescheduledaccount shall continue to be classified as non-perfonnin-e. Rescheduled accommodation classified asnon-perforrning can be declassified only when the repayments under the rescheduled terms have beenmade for a continuous period of six months.8. For the purpose of this Direction, "accomrnodation" shall mean loans; facilities under hire purchase orleasing agreements; provision of funds throu-eh redeemable cumulative preference shares and debtsecurities such as bonds, debentures, asset backed securities, commercial paper/promissory notes; intercompany credit; any arrangement to provide funds on a repayable basis; any comrnitment to acceptcontingent liabilities; or such other financial facility as may be determined by the Director.9. For the purpose of this Direction, "inter company credit" shall mean any form of accommodationextended by a relevant establishment to its directors or to their relatives and/or to its associatecompanies and/or to its subsidiary companies and/or to its holding company. For the .purpose of thisDirection, "relative" shall mean the spouse and/or dependent child of an individual. A company shalldeem to be an "associate company" of another company, where shares equivalent to 20 per cent ormore but less than 50 per cent of the issued and paid-up ordinary share capital are held by such othercompany.l0.For the purpose of this Direction, "subsidiary company" and "holding company"meaning as contained in section 150 of the Companies Act, No. 17 of L982.ll.For the purpose of this Direction, "non-performing accommodation" shall meanwhere the instalments have been in arrears for more than six months.12.For the purpose of this Direction, "Director" means the Director of the Department of Supervision ofNon-Bank Financial Institutions of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka.* Annex I is at page (lxii)

FINANCE LEASING ACT'. NO. 56 OF 2000

Direction given by the Director of the Department of Supervision of Non-Bank Financial Institutions, undersection 34 of the Finance Leasing Act, No. 56 of 2000.Mrs L K GunatilakeDirectorDepartment of Supervision of Non-Bank Financial InstitutionsCentral Bank of Sri LankaOn this 28'h day of December, 2005

DIRECTION NO. 3 OF 2OO5l. This Direction may be cited as the Finance Leasing (Single Borrower Limit) Direction No.3 of 2005and shall apply to every registered finance leasing establishment, other than licensed commercialbanks and licensed specialised banks which are governed by the Banking Act, No.30 of 1988 andregistered finance companies which are governed by the Finance Companies Act, No.78 of 1988. TheDirection shall come into operation with effect from 2 January 2006.2. Every registered finance leasing establishment to which this direction is applicable shall hereinafterbe referred to as a "relevant establishment".

3. " Subject to the provisions in paragraph 5 hereunder, the maxirnum of a single accommodations or the' aggregate of accommodations granted to and outstanding at any point of time from an individualborrower, shall not exceed 15 per cent of the capital funds as shown in its last audited balance sheet.4. Subject to the provisions in paragraph 5 hereunder, the aggregate of accommodations granted to andoutstanding at any point of time from any group of borrowers shall not exceed 20 per cent of thecapital funds as shown in its last audited balance sheet-5. The maximum of a single accommodation or the aggregate of accommodations granted to andoutstanding at any point of time from any director, holding company or subsidiary companies of therelevant establishment shall not exceed 15 per cent of the capital funds as shown in its last auditedbalance sheet. Such accommodation shall be granted on such terms as may be applicable to any otherborrower of the relevant establishment and particulars of such accommodation including the name ofthe borrower, the date of.grant of the accommodation or inter company credit, amount granted,

shall have the same

any accommodation

( lviii)Gentral Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

repayment programme, security and rate of interest shall be reported to the Director within 14 daysfrorn the date of granting of sucl't accommodation.6. Where a sin,ele accommodation or the aggregate of accommodations -qranted to and outstanding from anindividual or from a group is in excess of the respective limits specified in paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 above, as at the

corrunencement of this Direction, the Director may ,eive such relevant establishment a period of two years frornthe commencetnent of this Direction to comply with the requirements uttder this Direction.7. For the purpose of this Direction "individual borrower" shall mean any sin-ele company, publiccorporation, firtn, association of persons or an individual.8. For the purpose of this Direction "group of borrowers" shall mean-(a) an individual and his relatives and a company in which such individual or his relatives holdshares exceeding l0 per cent of the issued and paid-up ordinary share capital of such company;

(b) a company and one or more of the following -(i) its subsidiaries;(ii) its holding companyl or(iii) a subsidiary of its holding company.purpose of this Direction, "capital funds" shall mean the aggregate of the following -

issued and paid-up ordinary share capital;issued and paid-up non-redeemable, non-cumulative preference shares;share premium;the Reserve Fund maintained under the Finance Leasing (Reserve Fund) Direction No. 6 of2005;reserves which are not earmarked for any specified purposes by any statute or by the Sri LankaAccounting Standards;retained profits or accumulated losses;

_eeneral provision for bad and doubtful debts which is an amount provided over and abovespecific provision on the non-performing portfolio and an additional specific provision onperforming portfolio; and(h) revaluation reserves (may be included with the prior approval of the Director where assets havebeen revalued in conformity with the guidelines given in Annex II**).l0.For the purpose of this Direction, "accommodation" shall mean loans; facilities under hire purchase orleasing agreements; provision of funds through redeemable cumulative preference shares and debtsecurities such as bonds, debentures, asset backed securities, commercial paper/promissory notes; intercompany credit; any arrangement to provide funds on a repayable basis; any commitment to acceptconringent liabilities; or such other financial facility as may be determined by the Director.

I L For the purpose of this Direction, "inter company credit" shall mean any form of accommodationextended by a company to its directors or to their relatives and/or to its associate companies and"/or toits subsidiary companies and/or to its holding company. For the purpose of this Direction, "relative"shall mean the spouse and/or dependent child of an individual. A company shall deem to be an"associate company" of another company, where shares equivalent to 20 per cent or more but less than50 per cent of the issued and paid up ordinary share capital are held by such other company.l2.For the purpose of this Direction, "subsidiary company" and "lrolding company" shall have the samemeaning as contained in section 150 of the Companies Act, No. 17 of 1982.

t 3. For the purpose of this Direction, "Director" means the Director of the Department of Supervision ofNon-Bank Financial Institutions of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka.** Annex II is at page (lxii)FINANCE LEASING ACT. NO. 56 OF 2OOO

Direction given by the Director of the Departrnent of Supervision of Non-Bank Financial Institutions, undersection 34 of the Finance Leasing Act, No. 56 of 2000.Mrs L K GunatilakeDirectorDepartment of Supervision of Non-Bank Financial InstitutionsCentral Bank of Sri Lankadn this 28'h day of Decernber, 2005

9. For the

(a)(b)(c)(d)

(e)

(0(e)thethe

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005(lix)

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

FINANCE LEASING (GEARING RATIO)DIRECTION NO. 4 OF 2OO5

This Direction may be cited as the Finance Leasing (Gearing Ratio) Direction No.4 of 2005 and shallapply to every registered finance leasing establishrnent, other than licensed commercial banks andlicensed specialized banks which are governed by the Bankin-e Act, No.30 of 1988 and re_eisteredfinance compatties which are govemed by the Finance Companies Act, No.78 of 1988. The Directionshall corne into operation with effect frorn 2 January 2006.The maximum outstanding amount of borrowings of a registered finance leasing establishment towhich this Direction is applicable (hereinafter referred to as a "relevant establishment") shall notexceed -(a) .subject to paragraphs 3 and 4 of this Direction, ten (10) times the capital funds of the. relevantestablishment, at any time, during the first three years from the commencement of thisDirection;(b) seven (7) times the capital funds of the relevant establishment, at any time, from the beginningof the fourth year from the commencemelrt of this Direction.Where the outstanding amount of borrowings of a relevant establishment exceeds the limit specified inparagraph 2(a) above at the commencement of this Direction, such establishment may be given aperiod of two years from the commencement of this Direction to comply with the requirernent underparagraph 2(a) above.A relevant establishment that has not completed one year in finance leasirrg business at thecommencement of this Direction shall comply with the requirement under paragraph 2(b) of thisDirection within 5 years from the date of commencement of this Direction, provided that:(a) During the first three years from the commencement of this Direction, outstanding amount ofborrowings of such relevant establishment, at any time, shall not exceed the level permitted byits Articles of Association as at the date of commencement of this Direction;(b) Where the outstanding amount of borrowings of such relevant establishment exceeds the lirnitsspecified in paragraph 2(b) above as at the end of the third year, from the beginning of thefourth year from the date of commencement of this Direction, such relevant establishment shalltake action to reduce its outstanding borrowings to the limit specified in paragraph 2(b) above.For the purpose of this Direction, 'borrowings' shall mean funds obtained by way of loans/overdraftsor issuance of redeemable and cumulative preference shares, bonds, debentures, promissory notes/commercial paper and any other form of borrowing as may be determined by the Director.For the purpose of this Direction "capital funds" shall mean the aggregate of the following -(a) issued and paid-up ordinary share capital;(b) issued and paid-up non-redeemable, non-cumulative preference shares;(c) share premium;(d) the Reserve Fund maintained under the Finance Leasing (Reserve Fund) Direction No. 6 of2005;(e) reserves which are not earmarked for any specified purposes by any statute or by the Sri LankaAccounting Standards;(f) retained profits or accumulated losses;(g) current year profits or losses;(h) generdl provision for bad and doubtful debts which is an amount piovided over and above the'specific provision on the non-performing portfolio and an additional specific provision on theperforming portfolio; and(i) revaluation reserves (may be included with the prior approval of the Director where assets havebeen revalued in conformity with the guidelines given in Annex IIt*).For the purpose of this Direction, "Director" means the Director of the Department of Supervision ofNon-Bank Financial Institutions of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka.

** Annex I I is at page (lxii)

l.

2.

3.

4.

5

6.

7.

(h)Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

FINANCE LEASING ACT' NO. 56 OF 2000

Direction given by the Director of the Department of Supervision of Non-Bank Financial Institutions, undersection 34 of the Finance Leasing Act, No. 56 of 2000Mrs L K GunatilakeDirector

Department of Supervision of Non-Bank Financial InstitutionsCentral Bank of Sri LankaOn this 28'h day of December, 2005

l. This Direction may be. cited as the Finance Leasing (Accrued Interest) Direction No.5 of 2005 andshall apply to every registered finance leasing establishment, other than licensed commercial banksand licensed specialised banks which are governed by the Banking Act, No.30 of 1988 and registeredfinance companies which are governed by the Finance Companies Act, No.78 of 1988. The Directionshall come into operation with effect from 2 lanuary 2006.2. Subject to the provisions of paragraph 3 hereunder, no registered finance leasing establishment towhich this Direction is applicable (hereinafter referred to as a "relevant establishment") shall take intoaccount as income, any accrued interest on an accommodation on which interest and/or capitalrepayments are in arrears for six months or more.3. In the case of any accommodation where instalments are not paid on a monthly basis, no relevantestablishment shall take into account as income, any accrued interest on an accommodation wheneverit has realised that instalments in respect of such accommodation will not be paid on the due dates.4. Every relevant establishment shall (in the maintenance of the books of accounts) se-eregate anyaccommodation to which paragraph 2 and/or 3 above are applicable from other accommodation undera separate control account in the General Ledger.5. For the purpose of this Direction, "accommodation" shall mean loans; facilities under hire purchase orleasing agreements; provision of funds throu-eh redeemable cumulative preference shares and debtsecurities such as bonds, debentures, asset backed securities, commercial paper/promissory notes; intercompany credit; any arrangement to provide funds on a repayable basis; any commitment to acceptcontin-eent liabilities; or such other financial facility as may be determined by the Director.6. For the purpose of this Direction, "inter company credit" shall mean any form of accommodationextended by a company to its directors or to their relatives and/or to its associate companies and/or toits subsidiary companies and/or to its holding company. For the purpose of this Direction, "relative"shall mean the spouse and/or dependent child of an individual. A company shall deem to be an"associate company" of another company, where shares equivalent to 20 per cent or more but less than50 per cent of the issued and paid-up ordinary share capital are held by such other company.7. For the purpose of this Direction, "subsidiary company" and "holding company" shall have the samemeaning as contained in section 150 of the Companies Act, No. l7 of 1982.8. For the purpose of this Direction, "Director" means the Director of the Department of Supervision ofNon-Bank Financial Institutions of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka.

FINANCE LEASING ACT. NO. 56 OF 2OOO

Direction given by the Director of the Department of Supervision of Non-Bank Financial Institutions, undersection 34 of the Finance Leasing Act, No. 56 of 2000.Mrs L K GunatilakeDirector

Departrnent of Supervision of Non-Bank Financial InstltutronsCentral Bank of Sri LankaOn this 28"1 day of December, 2005

Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005(hi)

Part lllMajor Administrative Measures Adopted by the Monetary Board in 2005

FINANCE LEASING (RESERVE FUND)DIRECTION NO. 6 OF 2OO5

This Direction rnay be cited as the Finance Leasing (Reserve Fund) Direction No.6 of 2005 and shallapply to every re-eistered finance leasing establishrnent, other than licensed comrnercial banks andlicensed specialised banks which are governed by the Baukin-e Act, No.30 of 1988 and registeredfinance cornpanies whiclr are -qoverned by the Finance Cornpanies Act, No,78 of 1988. Tlre Directionslrall corne into operation with effect fronr 2 January 2006.A re-eistered finance leasing establishrnent to which this Direction is applicable (hereinafter referred toas a "relevant establishment") shall maintain a reserve fund (hereinafter referred to as the "the ReserveFund") and shall, out of the net profits after the payment of tax of each year, before any dividend isdeclared, transfer to the Reserve Fund -(a) a sum equivalent to not less than 5 per cent of such profits until the amount of the ReserveFund is equal to 50 per cent of the issued and paid-up ordinary share capital of the relevantestablishment; and(b) a further sum equivalent to not less than 2 per cent of such profits until the amount of theReserve Fund is equal to the issued and paid-up ordinary share capital of the relevantestablishrnent.3. Relevant establishments that have reserves and retained profits which are not earmarked for anyspecified purposes by statute or by the Sri Lanka Accounting Standards, may transfer such reserves tothe Reserve Fund. If the amount so transferred satisfies the conditions under 2(a) and 2(b) above, suchestablishrnent need not transfer any amount to the Reserve Fund thereafter. However, in the event theamount so transferred does not satisfy the conditions under 2(a) and 2(b) above, such relevantestablishrnent shall continue to transfer out of the net profits after the payment of tax of each year,before any dividend is declared, to the Reserve Fund as required under 2(a) and 2(b) above.

GUIDELINES FoR THE 'ELECTI'N oF 'ALUERS

Annex I

With regard to land and building, the asset should be valued by a valuer who is -l. a chartered valuation surveyor ; or2. a fellow of the Institute of Valuers (Sri Lanka) with a Degree or Diplorna in Valuation and with workexperience of 15 years ; or3. a graduate member of the Institute of Valuers (Sri Lanka) with work experience of over l8 years ; or4- an associate of the Institute of Valuers (Sri Lanka) with work experience over 20 years ; or5. a licenciate of the Institute of Valuers (Sri Lanka) with work experience of over 25 years.

Annex II

GUIDELINES FOR THE DETBRMINATION OF ELIGIBLE REVALUATION RESERVES

One hundred percent of revaluation reserves are eligible to be considered as capital funds for the purposes ofthe Finance Leasing (Single Borrower Limit) Direction No. 3 of 2005 and Finance Leasing (Gearing Ratio)Direction No. 4 of 2005 where such revaluation is carried out subject to the following conditions -(a) the valuation is to be undertaken with the prior approval of the Director of the Department ofSupervision of Non-Bank Financial Institutions;(b) an asset is qualified for revaluation only after 7 years, frorn the previous date of valuation or frorn thedate of purclrase, whichever is later;(c) the asset slrould be valued by a valuer who is -i) a chartered valuation surveyor ; orii) a fellow of the Institute of Valuers (Sri Lanka) with a De-eree or Diploma in Valuation and withwork experience of l5 years ; oriii) a graduate nrember of the Institute of Valuers (Sri Lanka) with work experience of over l8 years:oran associate of the Institute of Valuers (Sri Lanka) with work experience over 20 years ; orlicentiate of the Institute of Valuers (Sri Lanka) with work experience of over 25 years.

I

2.

iv)v)

( lxii)Central Bank of Sri Lanka Annual Report - 2005